






























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































    * (2) “Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians!
     * (2) “It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow
     * (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that
1. Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience to
30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the town house,
abandoned in the center?” he inquired, searching with his eyes for
a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliant ideas occur which
abandoning all hope of a junction with Buxhöwden. If Kutúzov decided
a battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two
about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down below, on
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
about Sergéy Kuzmích that interested Prince Vasíli just then, and
about the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about
about the old prince and criticized him.
about two thirds of a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostóv saw the
above and below him in social standing. Something always drew him toward
Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orb
a bright smile, “so she won’t come down. It is natural in her
a case.
accent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when
accompanied by adjutants, galloped off in different directions, and
account of court and personal considerations tens of thousands of lives,
a celebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the
a ceremonial march past him, and Rostóv on Bedouin, recently purchased
a chance to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in
a clear blue sky, and the sun’s vast orb quivered like a huge hollow,
a commanding officer’s quarters, the regiment began to move: the
a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define, but it
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkónski, through whom he hoped to
a crafty man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so
across his path. Rostóv put his horse to full gallop to get out of the
action, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.
action—he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign
activities of 160,000 Russians and French—all their passions, desires,
actuated by a real desire for peace.
added: “What a lot of men have been crippled today—frightful!”
addressed the horseman with the white plumes, evidently suggesting
address. He is a wise and clever fellow.”
addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have been
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
addressing him as ‘Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.’”
a deed to sign for the princess’ benefit.
a dinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was a
adjutant on Kutúzov’s staff, but he does everything alone. The next
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
adjutants met him with news of the successful result of the action.
adjutant whom he so hated.
adroitness and Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale about him and
advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.
advice is to let the matter drop. Well then, on Friday after the review
a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
a few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly
affair. I am her father.”
affairs and of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of
affair was over and, though not big, had been a successful engagement.
afflicted by the death of the father he had hardly known), and her
a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of
a flag of truce, demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor, was
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasíli’s servants came one
afraid of a general battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!”
a French soldier tugged at the other. He could distinctly see the
A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.
a friend older than himself and whom he respected. His whole time
after another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess
After five o’clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade
After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field
after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused
After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the
After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
after their active service, were stationed near Olmütz and the camp
after the soup the prince became more genial.
again.
again, and let his head sink still lower.
again and remained for a while with the Ismáylov regiment.
again, and the little princess curiously noting the impression
again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse
Again Rostóv looked intently into Borís’ eyes and sighed. Berg
against the French?”
a general engagement,” repeated Dolgorúkov, evidently prizing this
“A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your
A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dólokhov
abominable, quite abominable!” said Prince Andrew, and he went off to
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her
“A geography lesson!” he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough
a girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from
aglow with dazzling light—as if he had only awaited this to begin the
a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the
a good friend, an adjutant general and an excellent fellow, Prince
agreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with the arrangements. Next
“Aah!” Rostóv almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The
a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. On
“A bit touched—I always said so.”
able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people I
a bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a
About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about
about him and about his love for him, letting it be understood that he
about him and even speak.
about him. He reddened and turned away.
about him or anyone else, and I don’t want anything of the kind.”
About ten o’clock Rostóv went to the English Hotel straight from the
about till dawn, because I think and can’t help thinking, just as
about to smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
“About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your
about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
about the corners of his mouth read to the Austrian general the
above his head: “Captain Túshin! Captain!”
a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him
accent—having noticed that Zherkóv could still hear him.
accompanying him to the hall.
“About your sister,” ejaculated Denísov testily.
above all this the lofty sky, formed the chief subjects of his delirious
a brilliant match—blushed like a girl.
absence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman who
absolutely necessary.
accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him, and at
a certain house—that was another matter and quite the thing for a
a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilíbin. He folded it up
a comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
a commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
a coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was
acquaintance—he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.
acquaintance,” said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger’s
acquaintances not only cordially, but even with a shade of deference
acquired though she did not understand its significance. This expression
acquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of the
across, snatched it from his hand and began reading it. Pierre looked
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racing
action, and more than that, you can’t make me believe that you do not
actual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet,” said the Danish chargé
addressed an edifying exhortation to them. He imagined to himself
addressing the black-mustached Denísov with servile deference.
a desire to do something for them, a desire for their approval.—So I
a despot. Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are
   A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man,
advantageous match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend...”
adve’sawies have wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your
a few fir trees.
a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharply
affectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary
affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
affirmatively.) “When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncover
a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster’s clerk at Yúkhnovna
a Frenchman), “L’Urope ne sera jamais notre alliée sincère.” *
“According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the
accountant, a stout, full-faced man, looked around him with a naïve
accustomed to win in their battles,” he concluded his evidently
a company commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happy
a convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,
a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the whole
acquaintance.’ In a word, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed, so
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
a cry of: “The general to the third company,” the missing officer
action did Prince Bagratión, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
action they had been wounded. “Day before yesterday, on the Danube,”
activity, Túshin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of
added.
added.
added he, munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, “would be
added, noticing that Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
addressing the Austrian general, “I have the honor to congratulate
address Rostóv by his title, as if in recognition of his confession.
a desperate cry and such mad, drunken determination that, taken by
“Adieu, Mary,” said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand
adjutant.
adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any
adjutant, Zherkóv, an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty,
admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
admit—he had almost been jealous on his wife’s account, was the butt
admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
advancing.”
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles
advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
advancing straight toward the inner door.
a fellow diplomat, “that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
a few hours ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrünn from
affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
affair of the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without
affair public. You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not
affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.
affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time
a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutúzov in a similar way. Meeting
“A fine mess we’ve made of it!” he remarked.
a fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?” Nesvítski
a foraging expedition. Rostóv in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his
a former war. “The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the
a freak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trick
“A French pancake,” answered Zherkóv.
After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on
After his dismissal from headquarters Zherkóv had not remained in the
After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived of
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he
after losing her own father. She is very good-natured, and my father
after the attack, Bogdánich would come up to him as he lay wounded and
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and
“After Austerlitz!” said Prince Andrew gloomily. “No, thank you
After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seeing
After Denísov’s departure, Rostóv spent another fortnight in Moscow,
after dinner. He called Natásha and asked her what was the matter.
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At the
After looking at him Napoleon smiled.
After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alone in his
After that Anna Pávlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not
after the battle but send a courier to Petersburg with news of a
After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again
after two in the morning, thoughts come and I can’t sleep but toss
again.
again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no
again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talk broke
against his right, flew round again in a circle. Natásha guessed what
against the muslin of the curtain.
against the pillow.
a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charming girl
a good thing for proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse upon
“After the next affair... epaulettes.”
after troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat’s
again are all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it,
again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill,
again. I must go there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won’t take a
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression
again on the sofa. They were silent for a while.
again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage
again see the sun, this water, that gorge!...”
against them and winding down over the uneven ground. One could already
“Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you
ago have joined the archduke. And believe me on my honour that to me
a good example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be
agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfaction
a handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkónski. Beside him was his
“Ah, Bondarénko, dear friend!” said he to the hussar who rushed up
“Ah! Breathing again, breathing!” he muttered to himself.
“Ah, and here’s Nicholas!” cried Natásha, running up to him.
“Ah! He is alive,” said Napoleon. “Lift this young man up and
“Ah, but you won’t talk politics to me like Annette!”
“Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!”
“Ah, it can’t be avoided!” thought Nicholas, for the first and
“Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody,” were the last words
“Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me.
“Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your
“Ah, my boy, my head’s in a whirl!” said the old man with a smile,
“Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that
“Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate,” she said. “If what
“Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor,”
a hoarse voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to
a host welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment had
“Ah!...” said Kutúzov glancing at Bolkónski as if by this
“Ah!” said Kutúzov. “I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your
“Ah! Telyánin! How d’ye do? They plucked me last night,” came
“Ah, my dear vicomte,” put in Anna Pávlovna, “L’Urope” (for
“Ah, Princess Mary!” he said suddenly in an unnatural voice,
“Ah, my dear, my dear!” he began, rising and taking her by both
a hoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a
a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russian
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
“Ah! That’s a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the
“Ah, she is indeed a darling! I’ll send her to you.”
“Ah, that’s always the way!” said Nesvítski with a wave of the
“Ah, that’s the way to talk French,” said the picket soldiers.
“Ah, Timókhin!” said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had
“Ah, Váska!” joyfully replied Nesvítski. “What’s up with
“Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is
“Ah, Wostóv,” he cried noticing the cadet’s bright face,
“Ah, there will be, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom
“Ah, those damned Germans! They don’t know their own country!”
aide-de-camp.
aim was to show General Weyrother—who had read his dispositions with
“A letter from Nikólenka! I’m sure of it!” exclaimed Natásha,
a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
Alexander Prince Vasíli had risen to high position and honors. And now,
Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the
“Ah, what have you done to me?” it still seemed to say, and Prince
“Ah yes, and what else did he say that’s unpleasant?” thought
“Ah, yes! That’s a whole long story! How are you going to speak to
aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and
aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair of felt boots
aim?” said he quietly and quickly.
a joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that
a lack of bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only
alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he was
alarm, supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased
a letter at once, and she’ll come here and all will be explained, or
Alexander’s Guards,” said the first one, indicating a Russian
Alexéevich. Loud knocks were heard at the door. Pierre took the bandage
alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.
alive could understand or explain.
alive—live: tomorrow you’ll die as I might have died an hour ago.
all, and without promising to help me?” thought Pierre, rising with
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all around
all. At last the sleigh bore to the right, drew up at an entrance, and
all commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I much
all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of
all-important.”
“Ah, you’re up already,” said Denísov, entering the room.
“Ah, your excellency,” put in Zherkóv, his eyes fixed on the
“Ah, you’ve come here too, young man!” he said, smiling and
aide-de-camp.
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were
air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fate
a keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The
a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of
a large udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweaned
a laugh still more so, he quitted the table.
alert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishly
alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath,
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the
alike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and this
a little to their right and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
all be killed,” a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
“Aline,” he said to his wife, “go and see what they are about.”
a little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse’s hind hoofs.
A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pávlovna said
“A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
all.”
All are struck by the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to
All began to run and bustle, and Rostóv saw coming up the road behind
all expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
“All I can say, General,” said he with a pleasant elegance
all like that; one can’t unmarry. Don’t be afraid; I won’t tell
allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers
allowed to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a
“All is over,” he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his
All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorúkov’s saying: “If you go on
all Moscow, that everyone will say that you, drunk and not knowing what
all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon
allowed, I have hastened to take all steps to that end. May I have
“Alley! Alley!” said the Cossack, touching the prisoner’s arm to
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be a
all its details to the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had
all make out: was it a glade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some
allow him personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his
all pale and exchanged looks in silence.
“All right, all right!” he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a
“All right, all right,” interrupted the prince, and laughing his
“All right, all right, we’ll see!”
“All right, all right. We’ll talk it over,” replied Prince Andrew.
all sorts of tempting wares. The Pávlograds held feast after feast,
All the advantages were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly
“All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, I
“All the same, it was Bilíbin who found a suitable form for the
all this end?” thought Rostóv, looking at the changing shadows before
“All this had to be and could not be otherwise,” thought Pierre,
All were silent. Túshin appeared at the threshold and made his way
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles
alone and in full view of the Emperor.
alone, but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are
alone, in which there was something more significant than in the general
alone together, Prince Vasíli announced his hopes and wishes to the old
alone with Hélène in the little drawing room where they were sitting.
alone with her, so Rostóv, now that he had attained what he had longed
alone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time before
a long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day of
aloud.
a loud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for the
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
already, but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
also. Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion,” added Prince Bolkónski,
altar with her. How and when this would be he did not know, he did not
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
always clear and simple, so she is not stupid. She never was abashed and
always dragging it in one direction. He tried to get away from them, but
always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging of his ship, so
a man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would not, for
amazed the French themselves. Rostóv was horrified to hear later that
a meeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
Amélie” (Mademoiselle Bourienne) “thinks I could be jealous of her,
amiably into his face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his
amid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought of
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostóv noticed Bolkónski, sitting
a movement. With a pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke
am staying in for your sake,” and so on. And though Prince Vasíli,
amusing,” he continued, with a sudden, good-natured laugh, “was that
a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops. It
an assiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread map
Anatole. “Ah, I know, I know,” she said with a sly glance, “your
Anatole came up to her. She still could not see him. She only felt a
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
Anatole is accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will
Anatole is no genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent
Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.
Anatole’s expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not
an attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog,
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat
and about Nikólenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received
and abruptly.
and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed
and acquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were so numerous
and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.
and affronts matter? I love and forgive everybody now.”
and after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand
and again proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther and
and all along the French line on the hill fires flared up and the
and all his comrades of the Guards by his appearance—that of a
and amusingly. “And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
and Anatole met in the conservatory.
and angry faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds
and as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
“Allow me to ask,” he said, “are you a Mason?”
“Allow me to give you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital,
“All right!” said Dólokhov, having finished the addition. “All
“All right,” said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling
All Rostóv’s cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored
all that has happened.”
all that the peasants had has been eaten up. I myself will remain in
all that would be required of him.
all the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a
“All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor
all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of
all this shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does
allusion to the name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons took their
“All well?” asked Rostóv, drawing away his arm.
all were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostóv.
“All wight! All wight!” shouted Denísov. “It’s no good making
all your valuables.”
almost at the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside Prince
a look at you, your excellency.”
a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of his
already in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and
already lost him. He bent over him and, as his sister had taught him,
already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawing
altar on which lay a Testament and a skull. Round it stood seven large
Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka, everyone
always afraid, came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malign
always poking fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!” And he began reading
always shall, and I want nothing more.”
A minute later Sónya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared
am I to go?” thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancing room
Among the young men introduced by Rostóv one of the first was
amusing, now girlishly enchanting.
an allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of the
“Allow me to look at your purse,” he said in a low, almost
all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, he
all regular Germans.”
“All right, all right,” replied the commander, and turned to Major
“All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto the
all sides, moved across the bridge.
all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, Prince
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the
“All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people,” said a third
all the soldiers’ remarks related to the two young ones. Every face
all this is not right, it’s not right! You may take offense or not but
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial
almost dragging him to the window. “That money is Denísov’s; you
alone at last gains a real victory, destroying the spell of the
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high,
already.”
already visible. Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep
also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his
always better to “bow too low than not bow low enough.” So the
(always followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth, a man, a
always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of
am.”
a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.
A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutúzov the day
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
amid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part of whom were
“A million all but one!” replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat,
a moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostóv hinted at, seized
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of
among them. On my word I’d give five years of my life for it!”
among them the staff officer and Zherkóv, who had been twice sent to
among the women!”
a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with
a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
ancestor of the Bolkónskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. The
and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of
and a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutúzov sat an Austrian general, in
and a flask, and Nesvítski was treating some officers to pies and real
and a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of
and also that Murat’s mistake would very soon be discovered, proved
and a muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had
and are drawn along.”
and artillerymen’s bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthest
and began firing them at Túshin’s battery.
And Bilíbin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma was
and blue riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at
and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
and carefully placed her in an easy chair.
and colonel looked sternly and significantly at one another like two
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had
and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge, but with the
and could not answer. “Can something bad have happened to me?”
And Denísov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostóv, composed
And Denísov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
“Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her
and accept the offer,” but before he had time to say it Natásha began
and, addressing him, again used the epithet “young man” that was
and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftáns.
and again it turned uselessly in the same place.
and again jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if
and all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may
and all you have been doing on your estates.”
“And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?” asked Nicholas,
and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. “Did he believe?
and amuse themselves as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are
and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and
and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his
and at last became silent.
and at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black sat some
and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowing
and began to speak.
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everywhere
and calling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child screamed
and connections he belonged to the groups of old and honored guests, and
and Count Ilyá Rostóv became more and more moved, more glass was
and Count Rostóv, glancing angrily at the author who went on reading
   And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...
and Dólokhov’s angry cry.
“And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted,” he added. “What
and, as you know my principles, I refer it to you.”
And at every word he added: “But don’t hurt my little horse!” and
and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined
and being well disposed toward Borís, who had managed to please him the
and continual expectation of some good, always in front of him but never
and dark. The officers were hurriedly drinking tea and breakfasting, the
“And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That’s just it, friend! Ah,
and dismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered the order and did
And Dólokhov swore at him in coarse soldier’s Russian and shouldering
and every strap in place, and shone with cleanliness. And not only
and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the
and feeling at that moment. “Is there anything at all behind that
and fell into the column to the measure of “Left... left!” “Close
and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.
and fencing from the village.
and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A
and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagratión than his courage
and good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French
and gun carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the
and had more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivánovich
and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions.
and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that the
and happiness... “I should wish for nothing else, nothing, if only I
and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he
and have seen Fräulein Mathilde.”
and having done this he rode back.
And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who
and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since
and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But the mere thought
“And didn’t Hippolyte tell you?” asked Prince Vasíli, turning to
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
and dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were
and distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river,
and, doing so, groaned involuntarily.
“And do you feel quite calm?” Rostóv asked.
and dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her without
and even now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburg
and everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
and explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them that steps
“And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasíli, pointed to it and began
and drowsy Kutúzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and
and ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to share in these
and extending its neck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse
and fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle
and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened
and, flushed and smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was
and for the issue of the whole battle. “But be that what it may,”
and Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some Russian infantry,
and frequent blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past
and fro, and dispatching of adjutants—was confined to the Emperor’s
and frowning brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet
and galloped along the line. At first he rode along the line of
and grieved had he chosen not to see them. These different
and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.
and handsome young man and woman for one another. And this human feeling
and happy though uneasy face of Pierre. It seemed as if the very light
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostóv,
and he again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergéy
And he again turned to Pierre.
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
and her look seemed to say: “Well, it is your own fault.”
and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
and he walked on.
and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
and his back drawn in, slightly swinging one foot, and, with his head a
and Horse Guards’ jacket, shouting something to a pale, white
and horses) had it not occurred to Rostóv to flourish his whip before
and how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband?
and how the well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not
“And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!” adding, after a
and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more
and handing on to posterity of a certain important mystery... which
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. He
and helped him. I know and understand what a spice that would add to the
And here’s the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can’t
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He knew it
“And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all
And he released Bolkónski’s arm to indicate that he had now quite
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostóv
and hills in the distance—and despite the fact that the inhabitants
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and
and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully,
and his kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed
and his lips were smiling. Though the commander was occupied in giving
and his one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers!
and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and
and his visit to Brünn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of
“And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like
And how has it ended? I was against this marriage even then and foretold
“And how do you get on with the officers?” inquired Zherkóv.
    * “And hurrah for the whole world!”
and hurriedly removed.
and I beg you all to help me. Brünn’s attractions must be shown him.
“And how she dances! What gwace!” he said again after a pause.
“And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!...”
“And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in
“And if he asks about the losses?”
And immediately Túshin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles
and involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near
“And I only...”
and is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,
“And I tell you, don’t you dahe to do it!” shouted Denísov,
“And I tell you, Rostóv, that you must apologize to the colonel!”
and I won’t allow it to be said!”
and kissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
And Kutúzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, “You are quite at
and like him. Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all
and looking carelessly about him.
and making pencil notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes
and more attractive.
and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once
and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his
and not with his eyes.
and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his
and parted smiling, the German returning to his cowshed and Rostóv
and pressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile.
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to
and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!”
Andrew.
“And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion,” he
“And I know why she’d be ashamed,” said Pétya, offended by
“And I might have been in his place!” thought Rostóv, and hardly
and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian army been
and irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of
“And I should be ashamed to write to Borís. I’m not going to.”
“And I will tell you this,” Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of
and looks of those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna
and majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with
and mingling with one another. He could also, by the gleam of bayonets
and more regularly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach Stream
and moved along the ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies
and musketry ahead of him. The firing grew louder and louder.
and my life, my life,” he thought, “must be risked?”
and not value her pure affection and devotion to me?” She went up
and of course not as ‘Emperor,’ it seemed to me it should be to
and one could hear their distressing screams and groans, sometimes
and only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished
“And our little tea table?”
and overtook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag
and particularly amiable smile.
and part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack
And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything
And Prince Dolgorúkov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother’s
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then
and regarded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist that in
and relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young
Andrew.
Andrew. “I wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!” he added and
Andrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploring
Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markóv, our ambassador,
Andrew was in and Borís was shown into a large hall probably formerly
Andrew went out with him.
Andrew, whom Borís was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who
And Rostóv got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming of
and she with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that’s why
and shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both
and silver of the men’s epaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved
and solemn, and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day of
“And so they are writing from Potsdam already?” he said, repeating
“And so you’ve had him educated abroad, Prince Vasíli, haven’t
and tears, till at last somebody else was asked to read it.”
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
and the boyish face Rostóv, breathless with excitement and hope, was
and the cannon, under the horses’ hoofs and between the wagon wheels,
and the difficult names of villages. Weyrother complied and Dohktúrov
and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to
and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, and
And the old cavalry captain, Kírsten, shouted enthusiastically and no
“And the other one is not here. They’ve been telling tales,” he
and the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were
and the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of
and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of
and there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Hélène,
and the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation,
And the talkative Dolgorúkov, turning now to Borís, now to Prince
and the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and
And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.
and ‘To Siberia!’” said Berg with a sagacious smile. “I knew I
and watched his opponent’s face, evidently thinking about the game as
and, whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him
and wheels began to revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to
and whom Borís addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkónski
and who was called Tit. He was saying, “Tit, I say, Tit!”
and with a bow to them both he went out.
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Borís, pointing to his own
and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.
and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
“And you’re still the same diplomatist! But that’s not the
“And you won’t feel ashamed to write to him?”
an excruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
an explanation, but meeting the latter’s impressive but meaningless
an expression of perplexity, turned round to Milorádovich as if seeking
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: “I think you were
angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the
An hour later, Tíkhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince;
an hour’s delay they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog
“A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow
animal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his
an immediate answer. Prince Vasíli had brought his son with the evident
Anna Mikháylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
Anna Mikháylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression
Anna Mikháylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
Anna Mikháylovna shook her head.
Anna Mikháylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still
Anna Mikháylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
    * Anna Pávlovna.
Anna Pávlovna’s “At Home” was like the former one, only the
an opportunity to express his doubts.
another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting “Hurrah!”
another, dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to
Another group was at the tea table. Pierre wished to join the former,
another, more important, subordination, which made this tight-laced,
Another, the red, stout Nesvítski, lay on a bed with his arms under his
another two minutes and it is certain death,” thought each one.
answered him either by a brief but appropriate remark—showing that it
answered the general.
answer that voice and went on dreaming of his triumphs. The dispositions
any moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a
anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out
anything, except only for permission, after the blow she had received,
anything. If it be God’s will to prove thee in the duties of marriage,
anything like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
apparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mère would appear
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand,
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
approached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man in
approached Kutúzov. Of Kutúzov’s suite only four remained. They were
approaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
a rage) and called for the company commander.
Archduke, inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.
architect not to go to the prince with his report.
architect’s attention to the sound of the prince’s footsteps.
are many stories of his getting to know an officer in just such a chance
are now two Russians, Milorádovich, and Dokhtúrov, and there would be
are there,” said the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek,
are they doing? What are they doing?” he murmured to himself, still
are you dumb?’ he shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
arms and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only man to
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
army, and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side
army, and in the night from the nineteenth to the twentieth, the whole
army’s campfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behind him;
(“Arnauts” was the Tsarévich’s favorite expression when he was in
around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held
around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
aroused him. He started and opened his eyes.
arrangements to the minutest detail remain the same.”
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman
artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandoned
As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
as a petitioner on behalf of this young man. You see...” but
as a true hussar in this battle, had been wasted. Their squadron
as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily
as Borís. “Count! I am wounded in my right hand” (and he showed his
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else’s place here
as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here
a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and
as if continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been
as if she had to give some final necessary instructions.
as if stirred to his heart’s core and himself regretting and laughing
as I remember Nikólenka. Him—I just shut my eyes and remember,
asked him to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? ‘But, my
asked one of the ladies.
asked Rostóv, with a contemptuous smile.
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
asked to see the portrait of the aunt’s husband on the box lid.
asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard
a slightly contemptuous smile, he said: “Yes, there are many stories
as long as I live.”
as many persons are to me—father, sister, wife—those dearest to
a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brünn.
as much self-confidence as if he were addressing school children—that
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as
a soldier’s cross, equally shabby cadet’s riding breeches lined with
A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
“A splendid soldier, splendid! ‘What am I attached to!’ Ha, ha,
as something generally known. But it was the first time he had heard
assured himself from the way Rostóv looked at it that his coat had been
“Andrew, already!” said the little princess, turning pale and
Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time
Andrew? Don’t forget that she has grown up and been educated in
Andrew entered the passage. Kutúzov himself, he was told, was in the
Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings such
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From
Andrew, “I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You
“Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
“Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him
Andrew... is Father’s way of treating religious subjects. I don’t
Andrew. “Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlóvski all the
Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had
Andrew...” she said timidly after a moment’s silence, “I have a
Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
Andrew, “that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a
Andrew was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and
and running so lightly, frightened Rostóv. He seized his pistol and,
Andrúsha!...” said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
Andrúsha—the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in
and scented myself.”
and see the standard flapping against its staff.
and she’s even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am
“As the enemy’s left wing rests on wooded hills and his right
“As there’s no one to fall in love with on campaign, he’s fallen
as they enjoyed their Rhine wine, sauté, and ices, and however they
as they have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not
As this Ápsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Milorádovich,
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
“As to your business,” Prince Andrew continued, addressing Borís,
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man’s
a stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence of
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters
“As you see,” he said.
at a command, everyone began to run.
at all as I ran,” thought Prince Andrew—“not as we ran, shouting
at all as it really was. Rostóv was a truthful young man and would on
at any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into
at a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered head. The
At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denísov’s squadron, in
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with
At dinner Anna Mikháylovna talked the whole time about the war news
At eight o’clock Kutúzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
a terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!”
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
at first irregularly at varying intervals—trata...tat—and then more
At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of the
at her reproachfully. “And who is it she takes after?” thought the
at him. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg;
a third, Count Arakchéev, if his nerves were not too weak.”
at his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
at intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in
at irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots,
at Kutúzov’s.
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.
“At least, change your coiffure,” said the little princess.
at Markóv, probably expecting Markóv to pick it up for him, and how
atmosphere of an army, announcing the approach of something decisive
at one another.
at Prince Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and
at Schön Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We
At six in the evening, Kutúzov went to the Emperor’s headquarters
attack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole of this
attained.
attention.
attention. Dohktúrov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with
attention. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, now at the sun floating
attentively to what Prince Vasíli said, but kept glancing at Princess
At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in
At that moment Borís clearly realized what he had before surmised, that
At that moment the door opened.
at the beautiful Hélène with her radiant face and at the red, broad,
at the council—the coming battle and the victory that would certainly
at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own. Czartorýski,
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a
at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He was
at the least firing. The Emperor’s gratitude was announced to the
at the map, but at Prince Andrew’s face.
At the Olmütz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemed
attitude toward him that had taken place in society.
Augesd.
“Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!”
Austerlitz, Borís was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorúkov
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and
Austrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at
Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his
Austrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged
Austrian, to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
a very long time. “If anyone finds this silence inconvenient, let him
a visit. “I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I
avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as
avoided the blow. “Thought... Blackguards...” shouted the prince
avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, and
avoid seeing all these suffering men, and he felt afraid—afraid not
aware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander in chief,
aware that in front, behind, and on all sides, other Russian columns
away.
away and he had just managed to catch her, “didn’t he tell you how
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
awkward to attract everyone’s attention and to be considered a
a yawn. “Plenty of time,” he repeated.
back to the house.
bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilingly examined the
Bagratión and Dolgorúkov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear
Bagratión cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite,
Bagratión’s detachment was reunited to Kutúzov’s army.
Bagratión stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostóv’s face
Bagratión’s troops, which had not yet advanced into action but were
Bagratión. “Wait till tomorrow morning, we’ll find out everything
bags into the carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank. The
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
balls! I can’t tell you. And the Tsarévich was very gracious to all
band, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.
baritone.
barrier except the barrier of his own will.
battalion and regimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave
battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and then Generals
battalion would follow him.
batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our
battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Túshin and his company,”
battle.
battle, and by the sight of the gallant Ápsherons, his comrades in
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve
battlefield.”
battle is won by him alone. Kutúzov is removed and he is appointed...
battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their
beams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself
be anyone’s lackey, but I who have nothing but my brains have to
be at stake. But this one is too light, it’s not becoming!”
beautiful eyes grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took
beautiful eyes. Last night a proposition was made me on your account
beauty as she glided away. “And how she carries herself! For so young
be carried back with it oneself. Bolkónski only tried not to lose
be carried out, was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother’s plan,
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
“Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
become a habit. Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the
be dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
been able to free himself but that Prince Vasíli (who had rarely before
been looking at.
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general
been thinking about you.”
Been under fire already?” asked Borís.
been unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother. What
before action which he had experienced as previously, all the inner
before?” and again he told himself that it was impossible, that there
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the
Before dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points. More
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
Before he reached him, Rostóv, who was a splendid horseman, spurred
before, or am I mistaken now? No, she is not stupid, she is an excellent
before Prince Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon
before Rostóv had time to make out what the black thing was that had
began.
began for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone down into
began. “They’ll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
beginning of the action.) “I think I sent you?” he added, turning to
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
begin the engagement.
begin, when did it all come about?” And here he was sitting by her
behavior to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in
behind. And now here we stand hungry.”
behind moved infantry. The commander in chief was standing at the end of
behind the Emperor. The Ápsheron men, excited by the Tsar’s presence,
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dólokhov with blood.
being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.
being too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it
“Believe me,” said Prince Dolgorúkov, addressing Bagratión, “it
Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on the
bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
be out of your way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!” he
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
“Be quiet, backbiter!” said Dolgorúkov. “It is not true; there
be ready to fulfill His will.” With this consoling thought (but
Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
be shaken in her determination.
beside Hélène. “This happiness is not for you,” some inner voice
beside him. “That must be the enemy’s camp!”
“Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right
beside the old prince.
be they what they might.
be thus boldly, provocatively happy.” “And what nonsense all this is
be very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young
be worthy of her. And that is what we shall see.”
black figures of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty
blame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. After
bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) “and I remained at
blissful face “like a vewy devil,” as Denísov expressed it.
blush.
blushing.
blushing—“of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letter from
body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by
bold forehead that bent over her hand and answered his question by
“Bolkónski!” he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness
Bolkónski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that
Bolkónski noticed the hussar’s state of mind, and it amused him. With
Bolkónski referred to Anatole as a “pupil”) “for the sake of my
Bolkónski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the
Bolkónski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.
Bolkónski, wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself
Bonaparte, and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the
Bonaparte like? How did he impress you?”
Bonaparte, there is a difference,” remarked Bolkónski.
BOOK THREE: 1805
Borís.
Borís and Borís was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from
Borís inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
Borís made a grimace.
Borís rose to meet Rostóv, but in doing so did not omit to steady and
Borís smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to
Borís was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers
Borís with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been
bosom as it rose and fell.
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.
Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
Bourienne—I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has not
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
Bourienne’s head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. “His
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: “I know nothing, I am the
Bourienne, with her ribbon and pretty face, and her unusually animated
bowed head.
boy... the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen,” he grumbled to
breathing, her movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him
brighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping two
bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
broke up two squares, your excellency.”
brother, and that Anna Mikháylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
brother Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!” and she shook her
brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at
brought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The
But although Alpátych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the
“But am I not too cold with him?” thought the princess. “I try
but Anna Pávlovna—who was in the excited condition of a commander on
but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill before
But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the
But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of
“But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him General
but Borís... No!” (She shut her eyes.) “No! there’s nothing at
But Borís noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
“But don’t hurt my little horse!” said the Alsatian good-naturedly
“But for God’s sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your
but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable,
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He felt
“But I do not know, Father!”
“But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the
“But it can’t be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!”
“and if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood
and I’ll write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf.”
and impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down
and in a way of which our last campaign can give you no idea. Half the
and in a whisper, with a strangely unsmiling face: “Come to dinner
and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. As to the
and insignificant people. But the army, the Russian army, everyone
and interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the
and interests before him! “Yes, they have taken a wise decision,” he
and into ladies’ society with an affectation of doing so against his
and in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs
And is it worth tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life
“And I was looking for you,” said Natásha running out to him. “I
and Kámenski the latter was preferred. The general comes to us,
and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, went away to his
and littered with cards. One tormenting impression did not leave him:
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
and looked at him closely.
“And love of one’s neighbor, and self-sacrifice?” began Pierre.
“And Mamma pressed her!” said Nicholas reproachfully.
and Martinists, even in Novíkov’s time. For a long while after he had
“And me, kiss me!”
and merry faces. It was Natásha, Sónya, and Pétya, who had come to
and Natásha, in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater,
And Natásha kissed her brother and ran away.
And Natásha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet
And Nicholas again kissed her hand.
“And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chief
And now there’s Dólokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and
and one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his
   And on the throne our Titus shield.
and opened the door for him.
and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away. She did
and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying.
and, pressing Pierre’s hand, he went out.
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of
and profligate life, though I did not like it and did not want to,”
and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity.
and proudly around while Bagratión spoke to his son.
and remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless, animal moans came
Andrew.
Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he
“Andrew, don’t!” said Princess Mary.
Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty
Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that the
Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead
Andrew’s presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views,
and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, asking permission,
and salt of hospitality, as, according to his understanding of his
and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book.
and saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholas understood that it
and, scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre
and secured their release by heavy payments. He did not know that the
and seeing her severe face said: “Well, good-by, Countess,” and
and several other less noteworthy persons.
“and should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done
and simply, “Mr. Shítov—a man of great merit”—this of the man
and sinfulness?” He paused again. “Who art thou? Thou dreamest that
and social tact,” thought he; “been proud of my house, in which she
and so further increased the fame of these dances. What distinguished
and so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they
and so sparkling their eyes. Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom
and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and
“And so you had to go through that too!”
and still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of
and still the same and in the same place. No, it can’t be! Surely it
and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing
and stooped glass in hand over the infant.
and stopped near him.
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a
and strength. He was continually traveling through the three provinces
and suddenly began to cry.
And suddenly the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the
and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still
and, taking Natásha’s hand, kissed it.
and tear whatever came to his hand. “Why did I tell her that ‘Je
and that daredevil after her!” said Anna Mikháylovna, wishing to show
and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasíli
And that’s how it is with me. À demain, mon cher.” *
and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun
and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 was given in
and the burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem
and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.
And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful
and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: all of which
and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of “Collector
and then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pávlovna
and then he suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected
And then to call him out, reckoning on Fédya not fighting because he
and the old countess were especially disturbed, and to a lesser degree
and the pistols loaded, Nesvítski went up to Pierre.
And there in the coffin was the same face, though with closed eyes.
“And there’s nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself,”
and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. Though he is a
and the second aim, that of purifying and regenerating himself, did not
and the traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked at him. All at
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved
and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand Master addressed him. He
and triumph.
and two or three friends—you among them—and as for the rest I only
and unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil which
and virtue than mere words. This chamber with what you see therein
and voices. This class of guests and members sat in certain habitual
and was a stranger there. In his person, honor was shown to a simple
and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the
and way of life.
and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive in
and went out. Natásha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting
“And what is she so pleased about?” thought Nicholas, looking at his
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm I
and where to shoot,” he said with an unnaturally gentle smile.
“And who has told you what is bad for another man?” he asked.
“And why didn’t you simply come straight to me as to a friend? I
“And why do you serve?”
And with a furtive glance at his son’s face, the count went out of the
and wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four).
and yet be happy....”
“And you?” he asked Dólokhov, but as soon as he had asked the
a need to escape from it by some strange, and usually cruel, action.
an eye on me! Very well then! Get along with you!’ So he writes the
angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned, turned as loosely
angry—but I know you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested
an illegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was the best
animal. Count Ilyá Rostóv, laughing and repeating the words, “Make
animation of the past or the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would
an indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father
Anna Mikháylovna sighed deeply.
Anna Mikháylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted
Anna Pávlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of
Anna Pávlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte’s friend, addressed him
Anna Pávlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to
Anna Pávlovna’s two years before. There were also present a very
announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kiss the
annoyance. “Good luck to you!”
an oath of fidelity to the laws of the Order. The candles were then
another.”
another candle. Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one
Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andréevich
another of the precepts—that of reforming the human race—and had
answer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay
an unexpected and tenderly paternal way.
any moment.)
anyone flogged or sent to Siberia—and still less for your serfs. If
any the worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the
anything, Dólokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly and
any women—countesses or cooks—who were not venal. I have not yet met
apart from myself.”
a partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and the
apparently immersed in his own thoughts.
appeared.
approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself, but rather
aprons like the Rhetor’s and holding swords in their hands pointed at
apron, such as the others wore, was put on him: he was given a trowel
apron, which symbolized strength and purity; then of the unexplained
are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
a reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it right, was it
are taken to the field marshal’s room, for he likes to do everything
are very pale!” said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,
are within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity
are young and I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in my
   A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!
Arkhárovs; they have a party.”
arm’s length, apparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left
army. You have brought your army corps to Pultúsk, routed: here it is
arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagratión, for few men knew
arrangements of the house, he interrupted himself:
arranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagratión at the English Club.
A rustle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of
as a child, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish,
as a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue
as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them,
as a veranda.
as elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to
a servant. From there they passed into another room. A man in strange
as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom.
as far as Moscow and to stay with him there. Meeting a comrade at
ashamed of himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to let him
as he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general of
as his own. What also conduced to Bagratión’s being selected as
a short pause, “but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for
As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know
as if astonished at the word. “Well, you see, I’m building. I mean
as if he felt a little confused before his son. “Now, if you would
as impracticable, he arranged for the erection of large
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation,
asked Natásha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what
asked to give up all he possessed.
ask himself. It was as if the thread of the chief screw which held his
“Ask him to wait,” and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed
asking.” But dying was also dreadful.
ask you to put the money on your cards,” replied Dólokhov. “Don’t
asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace the
a slipper for his left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment,
“As may happen,” said Rostóv.
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was
“A splendid reply!” said Napoleon. “Young man, you will go far!”
as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been
as reported by the division commanders, Ostermann and Sedmorétzki, and
as she sat in her room. But owing to the superstition that the fewer
As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage
As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere
As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposed
assumed a dignified expression, which with characteristic tact she had
a star-shaped light. At one side of the table was a small carpet with
as the “angel incarnate.”
as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagratión was embarrassed, not
as they watched their young people executing their newly learned steps,
a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some
as were all the words he spoke that day, and Count Ilyá looked joyfully
asylums, and schools were to be established on all the estates. Some of
as you and Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and
as you may, always remain the same backs and foreheads.”
as young Bezúkhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to give
as young people often do. “No, I am too happy now to spoil my
“As you please... really... I think so... but as you please,” said
at Bagratión over each other’s shoulders, as if he were some rare
at balls, amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women,
At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre’s marriage.
at Dólokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous
at first impossible to enter the drawing room door for the crowd of
At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,
at her timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by hounds
at his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,
at his partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenly stamped with
at home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. His
At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after returning
atmosphere characteristic of homes where there are very young and very
atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostóvs’ house as at
a toy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre,
attack our headquarters, and the commander in chief has to ask for a
attacks. Both generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on
attacks the Prussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have
attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim; but
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield
attention of all to Borís’ narrative was shown by Hélène. She asked
attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women,
attention to the verses.
at that moment made itself felt.
At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike,
At that time in the Rostóvs’ house there prevailed an amorous
at the Arkhárovs’ ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal
At the beginning of March, old Count Ilyá Rostóv was very busy
at the bottom of the sleigh beside Rostóv, who grew more and more
at the club dinner.
at the door,” and Natásha ran across the drawing room to the dancing
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shyly
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt a
at the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no
at the sound and then, smiling at his own sensations, stood still. The
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt
at the world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one
attire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping toward him, said
Austrian Council of War at which Suvórov crowed like a cock in reply to
Austria,” said Mortemart. “The Emperor of Austria can never have
authority in his voice. “Who invented Him, if He did not exist? Whence
a very bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. Those who
a victory over Bonaparte, just when I’m not serving. Yes, yes, he’s
“A visitor,” answered Antón.
avoid General Buxhöwden who by right of seniority should be our chief.
away? But where to? It’s one—let them sing!”
away from her. “Destroying the army, destroying the men! And why? Go,
away her tears on her sister-in-law’s knee.
away. Involuntarily recalling his wife’s past and her relations with
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,
a word to the questions addressed to him. But on entering Moscow he
a worthy dwelling place of the Great God,” he added, and closed his
a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow. With her
back.
back, “give me your hand.” She took her sister-in-law’s hand and
backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the
“Bad! Bad!” exclaimed Pierre. “We all know what is bad for
“Bad! But it’s not that, my friend—” said Dólokhov with a
bad for another traveler, and for himself it’s unavoidable, because
badly through his spectacles, but that his wife’s connection with
“Bad news! He’s not among the prisoners nor among the killed!
Bagratión appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,
Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and
ballroom.
ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pink
bandage was again removed and more than ten voices said together: “Sic
bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at the
bare chest. He was conducted from that room along passages that turned
bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular façade
battalion to disperse them. During one of these attacks they carried off
battle, a list of whom has been sent me under flag of truce.”
bears!...”
bear the whole burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go through!
beautiful Hélène, whose eyes several times met those of the handsome
beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy—a supreme joy apart from the
be better dressed than others, and would rather deprive himself of many
be brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots
because he could not. In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rostóv
become calmer since I began to live only for myself.”
become completely changed, and had quite left behind his former habits
become cruel and harsh, are conscious of it, but cannot restrain
becomes a man who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won’t
become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had
be done; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, was
been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories
been brought up in the most aristocratic circles.
been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from
been ready, but they still delayed and all were silent.
been so pleased at Olmütz and according to which an ensign might rank
been taken by the French as a trophy.)
been trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessness
been vicious only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to
befallen his son.
before and was less frequently at home.
before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed,
before. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
before the battle, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and
before the Jews.”
before the master arrived. Everywhere preparations were made not for
before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I
began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses. After the fish,
began reading. The old prince, now and then using abbreviations, wrote
began speaking clearly and definitely. Reasons were found for the
began to be said. These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians, a
begin,” he whispered, and taking up his glass, he rose. All were
begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same
being (and which struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own
being carried by. She looked out. The men servants were carrying the
being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station.
believed he would be reborn to a new life.
believe everything you’re told. You were told...” Hélène laughed,
believes, in the speaker’s tone of conviction and earnestness, or
Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and—like rye shaken together
below.
Bending forward in his armchair he said: “Le Roi de Prusse!” and
Beneath his smile Rostóv saw in him the mood he had shown at the club
Berg was mentioned, by those who did not know him, as having, when
Besides this refined selection of society Anna Pávlovna’s receptions
be talked over at length. At last the conversation gradually settled on
betraying her sympathy for the “daredevil,” as she called Dólokhov.
between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over
between them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did not
be virtuous. Not a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul. He
bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed out and
beyond ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in
Bilíbin, “as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I
Bilíbin’s letter which was written in French. He read without
Bilíbin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, and
Bilíbin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. When he
black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natásha.
bleed him and patch him up. He will drag about as a cripple, a burden to
blindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he was
blinked, went red, got up and sat down again, struggling with himself
blood. On seeing this, Pierre moved forward with his breast toward the
blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break
Bogdánovna.
Bogdánovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room.
Boguchárovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among
boldly, “if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and
Bolkónski recognized Prince Repnín whom he had met in Petersburg
Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse.
Bonaparte, ‘that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my
Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war
BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07
BOOK FOUR: 1806
book had been sent him by someone unknown. One thing he continually
boots between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the
Borís, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,
Borís listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting his turn,
Borís promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a
Borís received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for
Borís smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical
Borís to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he
born, and so on. Then he was again led somewhere still blindfolded,
bottles of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the
brain—that’s all that’s left me!” And at the same time he said
brandishing the slab.
brave?”
breast with the other hand and to repeat after someone who read aloud
breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor (by which name the
brick buildings, built to plan, were being built by serfs whose manorial
bright and happy eyes at her sister-in-law.
bright. Sónya ran away, but Natásha, taking her brother’s arm, led
bright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist’s face. His mouth wore
   Bring glory then to Alexander’s reign
bring him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee. But
broken off, the porch, and the post by the side of the pavement. He
Brotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Order
brotherhood of man,” he kept saying to himself, associating these
“and showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna
and show you what kind of rivet to use.”
and sit. This morning I turned them all out and now look, it’s full
“And so he is! Quite blind!”
and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commander in chief walked
and sometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers’ or
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
and taking Nesvítski’s arm he left Zherkóv, who did not know what to
“And tell Mr. Dólokhov that I won’t forget him—he may be quite
“And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were
and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.
and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the
and the general in white, accompanied by the suite, walked between the
and the glory that awaited him.
And the latter—unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar
and the munching of the lieutenant.
and then at the other.
“And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt
and the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders
And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
“And there hasn’t been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and
And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostóv.
and the tramp of horses’ hoofs were heard. Kutúzov and his suite were
and they awoke in him astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling
“And they said Kutúzov was blind of one eye?”
And this “Well!” sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying: “Now
and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear going to the war, or was
and took hold of the commander’s stirrup, almost leaning against him.
and, walking backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and
and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention
and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
“And we, my dear boy! It’s terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,
and went out of the corridor.
and went to the door.
“And what about his character?” asked the regimental commander.
“And what devil made me go to that wat?” (an officer nicknamed
“And where is Lise?” he asked, answering her question only by a
and while Kutúzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assume
“And who are you?” cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy
“And why are they stopping? There’s no proper order!” said the
“And why didn’t you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have
“And why is it?”
“And will she soon be confined?” and shaking his head reproachfully
and wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking
and with a hooked nose. Then came two more, and many more running
and with this object offered a three days’ truce on condition that
and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must
“And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite
“And you didn’t see that everybody is packing up?”
and your capital!’ The one general whom we all loved, Schmidt, you
an exemplary officer of twenty-two years’ service, who had never been
anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for
angrily and disrespectfully at Kozlóvski.
angrily at him. Bondarchúk’s horse swerved and galloped past.
angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study
angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
angry with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrúsha,” she added,
animated, and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In the study were four
an inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostóv rode up to
an inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
an old friend.
an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry;
an orderly’s charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with
“An order to who?” asked the colonel morosely.
another.
Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: “Afraid or not, you can’t
Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarénko had already
“Another Ismail comrade,” said he. “A brave officer! Are you
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the
another’s faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers who
another, they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,
Another time he interrupted, saying:
answered.”
answered Lavrúshka. “I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
answers to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest
Antónov.”
“Any news from Mack?”
anyone, but you know it yourself.”
anyone if he is in disfavor. Now come here.”
anything else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not been
anything to say, say it. These two things can be done together,” he
a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
a peg on which to hang the prince’s favorite topic, he looked
apologize.”
apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdánich may
apologizing for the state of his gun.
a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
appeared from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man
appeared in the doorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward
appeared on his nose, the redness of which was evidently due to
appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostóv watched his enemy,
appeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the
appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy’s troops.
apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.
approached.
approached the door of the minister’s room. He felt offended, and
approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fully
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up
a quite unexpected, chance of saving the army. On receiving the news
archduchess also wished to see him. He did not know whom to answer, and
archduke’s as good as another, as you know) and even if it is only
are being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and
are childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one
are the French!’ Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is
“Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you...”
a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
arm. He began to laugh.
army, and the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous
army was very favorable.
army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.
arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment;
artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. “Not like your honor!”
artilleryman, wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if
artillerymen, Túshin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they
artillery sentry was pacing up and down; he stood at attention when the
artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.
as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in
a schoolboy who is told to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots
as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing
a sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. The
“As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;
as he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word
As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the
as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant,
as he rode by.
As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed
As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also, and
a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
aside with his arm, said in a breathless voice,
as if flinging something to the ground, the drummer—a lean, handsome
as if guessing what it was about.
as if to explain such a question.
as if to reassure Prince Andrew.
“As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean,” said a young soldier
as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go there
“As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always
asked and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a
asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity. The
asked the prince’s permission to ride round the position to see the
asking forgiveness?”
asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvítski’s nose.
A soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
a son of Nicholas Bolkónski, I shall be ashamed!”
as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,
assiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others that
assigned to cavalry-captain Denísov, the squadron commander, known
assigned to the commander of the Pávlograd regiment in which Rostóv
As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless
“A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off,” said an
as their officer—all looked at their commander like children in an
as the right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy’s
as though running away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides
A stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
a strange caprice of his employer’s was admitted to table though the
as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of
as well as that the French were outflanking our left. The general
at a full gallop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was
at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish
“At boss zides, Captain,” he heard the voice of the colonel, who,
at each alternate step; and in time to this, with stern but varied
at eight o’clock in the morning
a threatening gesture. “If the purse isn’t found I’ll flog you,
a thud. Denísov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something.
at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
at Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhtúrov to
atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a
at one another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded.
at Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon’s mouth. The short,
“A trifle,” said the colonel in his bass voice: “two hussars
a truce and sent his adjutant to Kutúzov to report the offer he had
A truce was Kutúzov’s sole chance of gaining time, giving
“At seven o’clock, I believe.”
“At seven o’clock? It’s very sad, very sad!”
attacked the men collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer possible
“Attack indeed!” said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his
attack very long. About Túshin and the battalion that had been in
attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not merely
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,
attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
“Att-ention!” shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking
attentively to Bagratión’s colloquies with the commanding officers
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been
At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
at the cadet’s troubled face.
at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our
at the French.
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had
at them.
at them and hack them to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful
at the soldiers as if threatening to punish them. Cadet Mirónov ducked
at the soldiers who were blocking his way. “Hi there, boys! Keep to
at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster
“At what o’clock did the battle begin?” asked the Emperor.
“At what o’clock was General Schmidt killed?”
at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.
a type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way along;
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can’t do it, as
audience with the Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
Auersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat
“Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to
Austrian adjutant, Bilíbin, and last night’s conversation. Having
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General
    * “A very good morning! A very good morning!”
avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one of those,
awaited their fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly,
away.
away at the dogs! But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them
away from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria’s treachery,
away with a grimace as if to say that everything Dólokhov had said to
awful!”
a white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing:
a white uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones. The
a wild beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew.”
a word to you and you... What?” he added with renewed irritation, “I
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face
baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks
back.”
back, Cadet!” he cried angrily; and turning to Denísov, who, showing
baggage and transport, having to accept battle on the march against an
baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defiling
baggage was already being dispatched to Olmütz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
Bagratión.”
Bagratión, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,
Bagratión as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: “We
Bagratión bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew
Bagratión called to him, and Túshin, raising three fingers to his cap
Bagratión gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in
Bagratión. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the
Bagratión, knowing Bolkónski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant,
Bagratión ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to
Bagratión replied that he was not authorized either to accept or refuse
Bagratión rode round the ranks that had marched past him and
Bagratión’s exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and
Bagratión’s hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.
Bagratión’s weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
“Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they’ll
ball, cleaving the air, flew over the heads of Bagratión and his suite,
ball flew past. Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the balls
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time, after a
bare hand as red as his face.
battalion came onto the bridge. Only Denísov’s squadron of hussars
battalion commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding the
beaming smile to his head.
be, anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You’re quick at
because his line was not straight, he reached the third company.
“Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness
be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Down below,
become of that scoundrel?” he asked Denísov.
be crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will
be easy, but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficult,
been attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been
been composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the
been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded
been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
been reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
been there at seven in the morning,” returned Bilíbin with a smile.
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagratión with his four thousand
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,
before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There
Before him, on the right, Rostóv saw the front lines of his hussars and
before him. The French had advanced nearest on our right. Below the
before his shelter, had been tasted.
before. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and
before it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Enns bridge,
before Krems was really of small importance in view of such events as
Before returning to Bilíbin’s Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop
before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army of
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
beg—I’ll take it!”
beg you to dress your men decently.”
behaving himself, and in general...”
behind each chair—stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
behind him.
behind him Bondarchúk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked
behind. One of them said something strange, not in Russian. In among the
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes
beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then...”
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
beside him. This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a
beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon. Before the guns an
beside themselves over there and one can’t make anything out.”
best of officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin to
better not look,” he thought, but having reached the bushes he glanced
Between three and four o’clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who
bewildered him with fine words, and he is so flattered by his rapidly
Bilíbin and the rest of “ours” burst out laughing in Hippolyte’s
Bilíbin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.
Bilíbin introduced him to the others.
Bilíbin. “It’s not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is
Bilíbin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be
Bilíbin’s house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle
Bilíbin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
Bilíbin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as
bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who
blockhead!”
blood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle. He had
blood on it. “Ah, here are people coming,” he thought joyfully,
blood rush to his heart. “But where and how will my Toulon present
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and
blushing and dropping her eyes.
Bogdánich knows how things are done.”
Bogdánich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
bold, tall, close handwriting.
“Bolkónski! Bolkónski!... Don’t you hear? Eh? Come quick...” he
Bolkónski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
Bolkónski shrugged his shoulders.
Bolkónski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The Emperor
Bolkónski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and
Bolkónski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the
Bolkónski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morning
Bonaparte!”
“Bonaparte...” began Dólokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
Bonaparte’s adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to
Bonaparte’s new triumph, tomorrow’s levee and parade, and the
Bonaparte, that they desire to see Prince Auersperg, and so on. The
BOOK TWO: 1805
boots and the clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful
boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers.
bore almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the
both armies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared
Both were silent.
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who by
bowed his head in sign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to
brag about it, but if he stays out till morning it means he’s lost and
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected
brave officer,” thought Bagratión. Prince Andrew, without replying,
breeches and arm.
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the
bridge. But this time Nesvítski could not see what was happening there,
bridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on this side of the
bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. When
     * Bridgehead.
bridge is taken! But what is best of all,” he went on, his excitement
bridge Nesvítski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
bridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he
bridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of
bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and
brightening up.
brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and
broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold
brotherly love, wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection,
brows he glanced into Rostóv’s eyes.
bugler, showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many
bullets. They reached the front, several bullets sped over them, and
“Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn’t
“Buonaparte?” said Bilíbin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead
“Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got
burn, I could not know by the holy spirit!”
    * “Busy already?”
busy with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: “Didn’t
busy with similar peaceful affairs—near the shelter of the regimental
but also for his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the
“But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other
but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the
But Dólokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around his
but extremely attractive.
But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, mingling
but his character...” said Timókhin.
“But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It
“But if you won’t accept money from me like a comrade, you will
but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that
“brother-instructor” as he called the Grand Master.
brother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands.
brothers, and burned with impatience to set to work with them.
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was
brought from Italy, representing an angel with outspread wings ready to
buildings—schools, hospitals, and asylums—on all the estates
built in order to have a nook of one’s own in which to be quiet. And
built lodge close to the pond. Antón, a man who had looked after Prince
bully,” thought Pierre, “to kill a man means nothing to him. It must
bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of
business!”
bustlingly searching for something.
but as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word, and
but attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one
But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections,
But before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domo announced
But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the countess
But before Prince Vasíli had finished his playful speech, Pierre,
but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince Andrew
but he did not explain to himself what these new relations were.
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,
“But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?” said the
“But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majestic beauty
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of which is only
but I do not believe it. I have no right to, and can’t, believe it.”
“But if for any reason you don’t feel inclined to talk to me,”
but I have killed her, killed... She won’t get over it! She won’t
“But I have nothing here,” replied Pierre, supposing that he was
but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed by Paul
“But in what was I to blame?” he asked. “In marrying her without
but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained.” Only they generally
“But I wish it,” he said. “I beg you—give it him!”
but looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet to
but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
But on Tuesday evening, having come to Hélène’s splendid salon,
but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into
but said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to
but shouldn’t we get the gypsy singers as well? You military men like
“But that’s all rubbish,” Natásha chattered on. “And is
“But that’s just the same as myself—they are not others,”
But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as
but to go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father,
but went on turning uselessly in the same place.
“But what do you mean by living only for yourself?” asked Pierre,
      * “But what the devil was he doing in that galley?”
but which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol.”
“But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels
“But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sit
but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the
“But you know how it all ended, don’t you? You heard of the duel?”
Buxhöwden is commander in chief by seniority, but General Bennigsen
Buxhöwden’s part and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen’s. But at the
by Anna Pávlovna, was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and
by her husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had
by highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to show them
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealth
by his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darling
“By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, to improve
By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed, he
by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutúzov had evidently failed to
by two considerations: his wife’s guilt, of which after his sleepless
by which the total exceeded the round sum of forty-three thousand; and
called her nephew—and playing with him.
calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr.
calling him in a whisper.
came a letter from Kutúzov informing the prince of the fate that had
came in from his club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearing him
came thy conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being?
came together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of the
came to these balls with an air of condescension and found them most
candlesticks like those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre
candles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light; the
“Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me
can I retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive.”
cannot attain the knowledge of which you speak.”
cannot know Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy.”
can’t get them from anyone else. He’s not there himself, so you’ll
can without hurting others.”
capable of receiving it.
card, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play.
care about them in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of
carefully wrote twenty-one.
carriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect on
carry him to the dressing station.”
carry out the count’s wishes, seeing clearly that not only would the
casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose
casket for Mamma’s name day and then going home. I was so happy, so
catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a warning gesture
ceremonious welcomes (which he knew Pierre would not like), but for just
certain, nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I
chair, and began deliberately with a smile:
chair, he drew up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natásha
chance, letting the seven be dealt to the right rather than to the left,
changed!... Where are the candles?... Tea!...”
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
charming girls. Every young man who came to the house—seeing those
charming that only a fool would renounce such happiness.”
chief, and our first foe, Buxhöwden, is vanquished; we can now turn
chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests,
childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
child’s little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he
choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill he began to cry,
chorus.”
chose and placed cards, and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the
clanking his spurs, whirled rapidly round, and, striking his left heel
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servants
clear.
clearness, and charm that it seemed as if it were all a lost and
clear upright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was
clinking of spurs were heard at the door, and the young count, handsome,
cloak and felt boots, he went to the little princess’ apartment.
cloak looking timidly at me,” he thought. “And what does she
club, but met in private houses in intimate circles, and the
coats.
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head with
cock, but the elder members glanced severely at the wit, making him
collapsed so that I don’t live at all—everything seems hateful to
colonel of forty to whom Denísov had introduced him.
“Come, let’s argue then,” said Prince Andrew, “You talk of
“Come now, deal!” exclaimed Rostóv.
“Come now, just this one more little card!”
“Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?”
comes from that! Even then I felt it,” he thought. “I felt then that
coming closer to Pierre. “In token of generosity I ask you to give me
command of the Third District, and my only way of avoiding active
command to the general next in seniority, Count Buxhöwden, having sent
companion, Dólokhov had come straight to his house, and Pierre had put
compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and
completely altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last groat to
composed and printed in the hero’s honor. Bagratión, on seeing the
composure, “now there’s this recruiting. My father is chief in
concentration on some one thought.
condition.
confess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of
confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete
confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma does
confidence the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own
confirmed by Pierre’s rupture with his wife, was the talk of society.
confirmed in this conclusion by the fact that Dólokhov left immediately
“Confound him, he’s a fool!” said Rostóv.
“Confound you and your Karl Ivánich!” He took the glass with the
confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his hands
confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasíli’s face.
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all
connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
   Conquest’s joyful thunder waken,
conscience that God has implanted in our souls.”
consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
considered him a criminal, and a year later they executed those who
considered myself injured, and Louis XVI was executed because they
consider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person’s wishes. Do you wish
consolation for our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
contrary one must try to make one’s life as pleasant as possible.
convalescence. Dólokhov lay ill at his mother’s who loved him
conversation with her, when Anna Pávlovna called him away on the
convey....”
convoy officer, who said rapidly: “We must halt here: the Emperor
cook calls it—has disagreed with me.”
cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking the
corner of his card and, instead of the six thousand he had intended,
could be heard above the three hundred others. He nearly wept. “To the
could disclose it to me.”
could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice that
could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of
could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.
could not reply.
could not scream like that—came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to
countenance Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyance and
countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps
countess’ house.
“Countess, I have done w’ong,” Denísov went on in an unsteady
“Countess Natásha,” answered Denísov.
“Countess...” said Denísov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face.
countess” to have a rest, but remembering something else of
Count Ilyá Rostóv, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft
Count Ilyá Rostóv separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At that
Count Markóv, and Prince Vyázemski—did not show themselves at the
count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for
Count Rostopchín, Valúev, and Narýshkin. Rostopchín was describing
Courage. 6. Generosity. 7. The love of death.
   Courage conquest guarantees;
Courage, my angel.” She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.
covered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break up during the
“Cover yourself!” even Denísov cried to his adversary.
crack and there was a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black hair,
criminal,” came into Pierre’s head, “and from their point of
critical moment the courier who carried the news of our victory at
crossed one on the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed
crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging over
curious embarrassment among some of those present. Sónya, Dólokhov,
curious to know what was going to happen and what would be revealed to
curtain aside and for some time his frightened, restless eyes could not
curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.
Curving her arms, Natásha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back
cynically Dólokhov had praised his wife’s beauty to him and from that
d’affaires.
dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.
dancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile. When
dancers do, Natásha, rising energetically from her heels to her toes,
dancing master) gave for his pupils during the holidays.
dangers. During these wanderings, Pierre noticed that he was spoken
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
“Darling Denísov!” screamed Natásha, beside herself with rapture,
dashing young hussar!
daughter is so young, and I thought that, as my son’s friend, you
daughter were having one not less important. Natásha came running to
day in Moscow. All Denísov’s Moscow friends gave him a farewell
dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.
dear boy,” and he drew Pierre’s arm downwards, “it is simply a
“Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the club—it will all blow
“Dearest... and me!”
“Dearest, I’m afraid this morning’s fruschtique *—as Fóka the
“Dearest,” said the little princess after breakfast on the morning
“Dear me!” said his father, who was in a specially good humor. “I
“Dear me!” said Rostóv.
“Dear me! Then what are you up to now?”
dear sir—took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young
death’s head. The stranger sat without stirring, either resting or, as
de beaucoup de mérite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother,
December, nothing was said about the war and the last battle, as
de châle, but at this last ball only the écossaise, the anglaise, and
decided to play until that score reached forty-three thousand. He
declared, was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor. The
deepest where the land lies lowest.
defeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz
defective commissariat, the treachery of the Pole Przebyszéwski and of
dejection and hopelessness)—at any rate, Pierre longed with his whole
deliberately so that everyone could hear:
delight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping
delivers its teaching not in words only but also by other means, which
demanded that he should submit. Feeling himself in their power, he
    * Denísov.
Denísov?”
Denísov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of the
Denísov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not
Denísov, Denísov! We’re almost there!”
Denísov first went to the barrier and announced: “As the
Denísov gave no answer.
Denísov nice?” she asked.
Denísov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer.
Denísov’s favorite barcarolle. Natásha was preparing to sing.
Denísov’s short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow
Denísov, to Rostóv’s surprise, appeared in the drawing room with
Denísov was looking at her with enraptured eyes.
Denísov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostóvs all
“Denísov! We’re here! He’s asleep,” he added, leaning forward
Denísov, with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord
departure Hélène returned to Petersburg, she was received by all her
depraved ideas of these days. I said so even at the time when everybody
depraved woman,” he repeated, “but dared not admit it to myself.
depressing and unsolved problem.
depth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with bread
desire to do good to his neighbor.
desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money from
Despite Count Bezúkhov’s enormous wealth, since he had come into an
Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeable
destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstädt and the
“Devil take them!” he muttered, and after listening to the verbal
did not, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk
did not calm her excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her old
did not draw closer to Sónya, but rather drifted away from her. She was
did not even make him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement,
did not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to
did not wish to confess.
did still harder work on their own land. He did not know that the priest
didst thou, and why did the whole world, conceive the idea of the
did that day. But no sooner had Natásha finished her barcarolle than
did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at once
different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.
difficulties had told Nicholas that this was all he could let him have
difficult to imagine happier people, and that God only knew what would
difficulty.
difficulty.
digested his sufferings alone.
dinner.
dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felt
dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed eyes and
dinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that’s not their
diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince
“Directly!”
disbelieved both the princess’ hints and the letter, but he feared
disheveled head from the hot pillow.
distinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother’s aid
distinguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the
“Dmítri,” said Rostóv to his valet on the box, “those lights are
do?”
doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they had
doctor who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the last post
does not produce the slightest stir—a blind man has left it. There are
does not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who
doesn’t have intrigues nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see
doing a little—though I did very little and did it very badly? What
dolls and who was still having lessons.
Dólokhov and looked sorrowfully at him. Denísov, Rostóv, and
Dólokhov, and words of honor?... All nonsense! One might kill and rob
Dólokhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostóv detested at that
Dólokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not for him to
Dólokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostóv in a way no
Dólokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and that
Dólokhov made no reply.
“Dólokhov, Mary Ivánovna’s son,” she said in a mysterious
Dólokhov often dined at the Rostóvs’, never missed a performance at
Dólokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributing leaflets
Dólokhov paused.
Dólokhov, Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might be
Dólokhov pressed Rostóv’s hand and burst into tears.
Dólokhov’s clear, cold glance met Rostóv as soon as he entered the
Dólokhov’s face.
Dólokhov’s hand.
Dólokhov’s hands and thought, “Now then, make haste and let me have
Dólokhov’s home: on the third day he received a note from him:
Dólokhov, slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside and began
Dólokhov’s offer,” he said, articulating his friend’s name with
Dólokhov’s proposal and Iogel’s ball, seemed to have grown thicker
Dólokhov’s second, and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for
Dólokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that
Dólokhov was a secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely
Dólokhov, who had no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was
Dólokhov, whom everyone in the house liked except Natásha. She almost
done. Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your
done no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help me!” her look
done, the Rhetor said:
done to me?”—said her charming, pathetic, dead face.
do not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what you
don’t care a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love,
“Don’t! Don’t! What are you about?” whispered their frightened
don’t forget to put out my new coat,” added Rostóv, fingering his
“Don’t, Natásha! What nonsense!” she said, hoping it was a joke.
“Don’t say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother and
“Don’t speak to me... I beg you,” muttered Pierre hoarsely.
“Don’t you wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?”
door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one
door, as though he had long expected him.
door behind him and satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the
doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face against his will,
downcast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally at
down in her easy chair, now taking her prayer book, now kneeling before
down on a sofa in the next room.
down on her with outstretched hands shouted, “Get out!” in such a
downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old count
downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew entered
do you know he has fallen in love with Sónya?”
“Do you remember we had a talk about cards... ‘He’s a fool who
drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed that
drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck.
dressed alike, in new pale-blue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, and
dressing gown every day, he invariably became confused and begged her to
drew in his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He sucked
drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could not stand his terrible physical
drive the princess away by that scream... “Killed!”
drive up, went to meet him.
drops and again went up to the cot.
duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his
duelist and rake, and every now and then he glanced ironically at
duel prove? That you’re a fool, que vous êtes un sot, but everybody
due to her misfortune. When conversation turned on her husband Hélène
During Rostóv’s short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he
During that stay in Petersburg, Borís became an intimate in the
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look
each face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with
each of those present, and the advantages that might accrue. He took
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostóv returned home on leave. Denísov
edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks in
   E’en fortunate Napoleon
efforts to seem calm.
Eh, Dmítri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate,” he said to the factotum
either,” he thought to himself, “I have done nothing wrong. Have I
either,” he thought. “Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all
elders which seems to say to the older generation, “We are prepared to
else.
else, my dear boy, let me tell you it’s quite likely you’ll have to
embarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denísov—“but my
embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek
embracing Denísov. “Nicholas wrote us... Natásha, Véra, look! Here
Emperor not everyone could understand, and with his whole soul he shared
empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the
emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor. Many followed
   Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre
end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directions to the
enemies, he tried to continue reading. But feeling this to be senseless
enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good. Thus fulfilling
energetic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is
energetically than anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and
engaged; he was shouting “Hurrah!”
enjoyable. That year two marriages had come of these balls. The two
enjoyment by sympathy with anyone’s sorrow,” she felt, and she said
enlightenment?”
enlighten their minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those
entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an
entered the room.
entertainment at the gypsies’, with the result that he had no
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince
entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address
entrusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties, severe
entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.
envious and Natásha could not help joining in.
equals, while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up
err, and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong.”
escapade made everybody feel confused. Denísov blushed too, but smiled
escape it all, and felt that Dólokhov knew that he could save him from
especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by the
essential to speak the whole truth.
estates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons
estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs.
eternal, and infinite in all His attributes?...”
eternity.” And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread,
    * “Europe will never be our sincere ally.”
even by a ball dress.
even Denísov was nothing compared to Dólokhov—“you must understand
even every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, so
Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of
evening to get in) “I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight
evening was this:
evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned.
event. In the English Club, where all who were distinguished, important,
everybody, for another ten years. It would be far easier and simpler for
everyone!
everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the general fell
everything became clear, and in all corners of Moscow the same things
everything from society and giving nothing in return. You have become
everything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely,
everything is calculated, and I don’t like that. But Denísov...”
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the
“Everything’s still the same with them,” thought Nicholas,
“Everything’s the same with them. They know nothing about it! Where
Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and
evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke
evidently also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, “I am
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown.
evidently wished to draw him on.
evil can there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like
evil. Le prochain—your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good.”
exasperated whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dólokhov was no longer listening to
excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
excitement, rushed toward the drawing room door, probably in order to
excuse his costume.
excuses now! It’s your turn to sing the ba’cawolla—I entweat
executed him—also for some reason. What is bad? What is good? What
existence of such an incomprehensible Being, a Being all-powerful,
expected this.
experienced a variety of most complex sensations. He felt afraid of what
explained Prince Andrew. “The others, one’s neighbors, le prochain,
explanation with Nicholas, Sónya twirled about before she left home
exposed, and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as
expressed disapproval of Dólokhov’s living at their house, and how
expressed his opinion more openly. He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre
expressing disapproval and dislike of Kutúzov.
expression and went out again without saying a word. She looked at
expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and
expression she did not understand, and lay down again. He was suffering
expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel’s face, Prince
extinguished and some spirit lighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and
eyes.
eyes and indicating Hélène with a sorrowful gesture. “Ah, she is
eyes at her sister-in-law.
eyes attracted him irresistibly.
eyes. “But I’ll go to Bezúkhov’s myself. Pierre has arrived, and
eyes grew dim. By the expression of her father’s face, not sad, not
eyes grew moist. “Hurrah!” cried the three hundred voices again,
eyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of
eyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest
eyes rolling as he sang, with his small, husky, but true voice, some
eyes, Rostóv re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no
eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his
face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the
face with Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old. Pierre
faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited
faire dans cette galère?” * occurred to him, and he began to laugh at
family, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties. Dólokhov
famous order of the day to General Bennigsen:
fancies.
fastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezúkhov, and
fate. It is in your hands.”
father?”
“Father! Andrew!”—said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such
father, muttered in a whisper:
father’s case.
“Father,” she said, “do not turn away from me, let us weep
father’s letter, he returned to the nursery.
father’s nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
father’s room, that huge room in which Count Bezúkhov had died.
“Father, tell me how it happened,” she asked through her tears.
father to fits of bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre’s
fault. What’s he to do if he has such luck?... And it’s not my fault
fear’s all gone, and your only thought is not to let him get away!’
fear this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other.”
features, gave him a rather comical expression. Bekleshëv and Theodore
Fédya, my dear count; that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few
feel afraid.”
feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before. When
feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostóvs’ household a
feel that in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so of
feet in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natásha, who,
feet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect.
fellow.”
felt a wish to speak to the stranger, but by the time he had made up his
felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will
felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also noticed a
festive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virile
fields and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. The
field under fire, as he had done at the head of the Kursk regiment at
fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting the
fighting Russian soldier without connections and intrigues, and to one
find the baby. At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he
“Fine men!” remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier,
fire and pressed it there!”
firing at Augesd.
firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left
firmly.
firmly believed in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in
firmly resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words of the
firmness and certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole
first because Pierre appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the
first of all devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do
first pair of gloves, a man’s, he said that Pierre could not know
fish for this dinner. The count had been a member and on the committee
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy
fixing his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and
flower; Natásha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly
fly upwards. The angel’s upper lip was slightly raised as though
following budget:
“Folly... folly! Death... lies...” he repeated, puckering his face.
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. Everything
For a long time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had to
for an instant, but there was no second report as he had expected. He
force their way through them with bayonets.
forefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be
forehead. He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it
forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even
forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the
“Forever?” said Prince Andrew. “Nothing’s forever.”
forget all that.... She says: ‘I shall love him always, but let him be
forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed,
forgot them. His head was burning, he felt himself bleeding to death,
for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It was
for life, but I don’t understand that, I forget quickly.”
former position after the campaign, had returned to Petersburg and come
former pupil of his.
for my sake! Did you know?”
for Petersburg alone.
for Prince Andrew.
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if a
for the future, Pierre’s journeys and occupations, the war, and so
“For the last time I say to you—turn all your attention upon
for these simple, kindly people.
for the society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and the
for the tenth time, Molière’s words: “Mais que diable allait-il
For two days after that Rostóv did not see Dólokhov at his own or at
forty paces’ distance nothing could be seen. For three minutes all had
for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed
forward. Of Bolkónski, nothing was said, and only those who knew him
forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile.
“For what have you come hither?” asked the newcomer, turning in
for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands
found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.
found out, nothing discovered,” Pierre again said to himself. “All
found the Prussian army. Borís, speaking with deliberation, told them
freedom and told her that one way or another he would never cease to
free.’ Isn’t that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn’t it?”
Freemasonry presented itself to him.
free, so lighthearted! And I did not realize how happy I was! When did
French pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with
fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained
friend Bolkónski, whom he had not seen for two years.
friend’s look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile
fright were amused by Pierre’s lisp and the new words they had not
from actions which would torment him afterwards.”
“but I remember putting it there.”
“But it isn’t?...”
“But joking apart,” said Prince Andrew, “do you really think the
but joyous and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.
butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
but like a priest’s benediction, approached the general. Though
     * “But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox
“But, my dear sir,” said Nesvítski as he drew up, taking off his
“But now I am off at once.”
but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
but only changed character. The horses were replaced by others from a
But Rostóv pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though
“But seriously,” said Prince Andrew, “we can at any rate say
“But still this does not mean that the campaign is over,” said
“But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which
“But the best of it was,” said one, telling of the misfortune of
But the convoyman took no notice of the word “general” and shouted
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
but the question “How?” that interested him. What the diplomatic
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon
“But the worst of it, gentlemen—I am giving Kurágin away to
“But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the
“But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect
“But you meant to stay another two days?”
bwicks and it’s nasty work! An attack’s pleasant work! Hacking
by Kutúzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the calèche galloped the suite
by someone’s order, the battery had continued firing and was only not
by the ammunition wagon.
by the commander in chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the
by the French who had crossed the Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his
by the living mass of moving infantry, Váska Denísov, red and shaggy,
by the way, Bagratión came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrünn
By this time they were all approaching Túshin’s battery, and a ball
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
cadet, supporting one hand with the other, came up to Túshin and asked
cahd.”
calamity! What a calamity!”
calèche stopped in front of the regiment. Kutúzov and the Austrian
calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five
came a man wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned,
came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead
came to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear
campaign is over?”
campaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, was
cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on the
cannon balls at the French with both hands.
cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came the
can’t, do what you will! How can I go and apologize like a little boy
can, with all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would
Can you fancy the figure he cut?...”
cap and smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand,
Captain,” and he turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
“Captain, for God’s sake! I’ve hurt my arm,” he said timidly.
captain, his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where
“Captain Túshin’s, your excellency!” shouted the red-haired,
captain up and down as he came up panting, slackening his pace as he
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the
carriage and rode up to Dólokhov.
carriage. “Get in with me,” said he to Bolkónski.
carriage, moved forward and, not noticing the general, looked out
carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all
cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of
cases only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been
catching and their sabers clattering.
cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostling
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say,
censured, should not be held to blame.
center, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the
“Cependant, mon cher,” he remarked, examining his nails from a
“Cette armée russe que l’or de l’Angleterre a transportée des
championship of the doctor’s wife in her queer trap might expose him
change in the expression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental
changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on—to explain
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVIII
chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers—fine fellows
chasseurs must hold their position till reserves from the center
Chasseurs.... They won’t let us pass, we are left behind and have lost
checked handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals,
cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had been
chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniform
childhood.
childhood.
“Christ be with you!” Kutúzov repeated and went toward his
circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if
clean, and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he
clear, insolent eyes in the general’s face.
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chief
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, “and what
clerk. “The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian...”
close by, who heard him muttering.
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
closer together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt:
close that the expression of his face could be seen. And the excited,
cloth, which contrasted with the others. “What have you been after?
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to
“Colonel,” he said, addressing Rostóv’s enemy with an air of
“Colonel,” interrupted the officer of the suite, “You must be
colonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvítski
colonel’s athletic back, his nape covered with light hair, and his red
colonel was called Bogdánich) “shuts you up.”
“Come along, our Matvévna!” he said to himself. “Matvévna” *
“Come here,” said Rostóv, catching hold of Telyánin’s arm and
“Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the
come in a moment. Petrúshka!” he called to his valet: “Come here,
“Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier
“Come, that’s right, Count!” cried the staff captain, turning
come up. In that case the dragoons could successfully make a flank
come up to him.
“Come, what’s the matter, old fellow?” said Nesvítski trying to
comfortably.
coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
Coming out of Kutúzov’s room into the waiting room with the papers in
commander among them! Hm!...”
commander, awaiting the word of command. A second and a third cannon
commander, but now that the commander in chief addressed him he drew
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
commander in chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the
“Commander in Chief Kutúzov?” said the newly arrived general
commander in chief’s regarding the regiment. Behind Kutúzov, at a
commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing this the
commander of the regiment in the hollow and news that immense masses
“Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to
commander’s back and mimicked his every movement. Each time the
commander started and bent forward, the hussar started and bent forward
commander’s will, owing to the tact Bagratión showed, his presence
commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not
command of the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and
command. “Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?” he asked
comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un ami, mais pas pour vous, pas
commissariat, and the regiment had marched some seven hundred miles.
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or
company and overtook the next one.
company commanders calculated and reckoned, and by morning the
company’s baggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on
company, which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having
completed.
comrade Nesvítski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a
comrades’ impression. Every face, from Denísov’s to that of the
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole
conceive a future life...”
concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that
concerning which no one could be at ease. It was the state of the
condition! It’s very hard.”
confronted one another as before.
conjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostóv, and looked
connections... Well, then, you just...”
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
considered an adept at French.
considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But among these people
considered important.
Consider, Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvórov; Moreau!...
consulting his sergeant major, Zakharchénko, for whom he had great
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
contented and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I
continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of range
continually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way
continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
continued. “One would think that as an artillery officer you would set
continued to shout.
continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
Contrary to Bilíbin’s forecast the news he had brought was joyfully
contrasted with his flattering words, “on the contrary, your
conversation.
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the
conversation in French.
cooked before we reach our quarters.”
correct. As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schönbrunn, sixteen miles
corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The
Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he,
cough.
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
could be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troops
could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their
could get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded
could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended
could hear. “I thank you all! God be praised!” and he rode past that
could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts
“Count!... Don’t ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,
countenance.
countenances became calm; soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew
counterattack. If they attack our center we, having the center battery
“Countess Apráksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has
“Count Lichtenfels was here this morning,” Bilíbin continued,
countryside—“See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there
“Count...” said Telyánin drawing nearer to him.
courage and endurance—acknowledged even by the enemy—with which the
courage had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry
courage. Next he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a
courage, so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it
course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He
covered this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to
cover of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
cowshed nor Rostóv back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any
“Crew, to your guns!” commanded the officer.
cried at each shot: “Fine! That’s good! Look at it... Grand!” The
cried her eyes out,” she said, growing more and more lively.
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men
cross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line
crowded round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who, tilting
crowded together close to his wheels and his horses. “What a fellow!
crowd had to wait.
crowd of soldiers. “It can’t be an attack, for they are not moving;
crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
cunning smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkóv’s
cup of vodka for the men from me,” he added so that the soldiers
damned fool!” cried Denísov, not pronouncing his r’s. “Such ill
dangerous.
Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of green
Danube, marching on us, you, and your lines of communication.”
daren’t say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign,
dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. The
darted forward at every word or gesture of the commander in chief,
    * Daughter of Matthew.
day he is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he’s
days.”
dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his
‘Dearest foe! Flower of the Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars!
dear fellow!” and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his
“Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept
dear, merry child. I have grown so fond of her.”
death, is here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never
death,” thought Bolkónski.
decently here,” continued Telyánin. “Now then, let me have it.”
deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always
defeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors
defection, ran at a trot, panting to catch up with his company. A cannon
defending us—doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending
defense—as much as to say: ‘Heaven is with us, but heaven help you
defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. Instead of an
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivánovich.
deliberately spoken word. It was evident that Kutúzov himself listened
demanded.
demand satisfaction of his regimental commander?”
“Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden
Denísov.
Denísov began to laugh.
Denísov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.
Denísov galloped up to him.
Denísov glanced at Rostóv.
Denísov joined Nesvítski.
“Denísov, let him alone, I know who has taken it,” said Rostóv,
Denísov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked with
Denísov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the
Denísov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his
Denísov’s face puckered still more.
Denísov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused
Denísov’s new cloak and saddlecloth.
Denísov’s voice from the next room.
Denísov. “They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they
Denísov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.
Denísov were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
desperate attack just to punish him—Rostóv. Then he imagined how,
despite the general’s presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
     destroyed, and you find that a cause for jesting!”
detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They
details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and from
did, especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he
did not wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired
did you come here?”
“Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room.”
“Dieu sait quand reviendra.” hummed the prince out of tune and, with
different companies did not get mixed. But our left—which consisted
different from themselves and from everyone else, expected great things
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
difficulty out of the front door.
dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
dinner,” cried several voices. “We’ll take you in hand.”
din of shouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud
diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do with
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,
dip. Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closely
direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schön
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
direction of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldiers
disastrous was about to happen.
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!’ It
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
dismounted. He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his
disorder and was retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagratión
disposition of the forces, so as to know his bearings should he be sent
dispute with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about the
disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the
distance and puckering the skin above his left eye, “malgré la haute
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
distinctly, but as often happens had not understood a word of what they
distinctness.
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing of
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
“Do come.”
doctor’s wife.
doctor’s wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
Dólokhov.
Dólokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hot
Dólokhov hurriedly interrupted.
Dólokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mocking
Dólokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his
Dólokhov smiled. “Don’t trouble. If I want anything, I won’t
Dólokhov’s reply.
Dólokhov, who had already changed into a soldier’s gray greatcoat,
domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to
done shall be. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilariónovich. *
done the job just as well.”
don’t get promoted to a sublieutenancy.”
“Don’t kick up the dust, you infantry!” jested an hussar whose
“Don’t like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don’t,” growled
“Don’t mention it, General, as if I’d be so bold!” replied the
“Don’t touch me,” said Rostóv, drawing back. “If you need it,
don’t trouble yourself further.”
door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white
doppelkümmel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
“Do stop joking, Bilíbin,” cried Bolkónski.
do the right thing.
do they look at me?” Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as
do to get here.”
down laws for Austria at Schönbrunn, il faut lui faire grâce de
down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his
down on the sofa, facing her brother. “She is quite a child: such a
down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.
“Do you know, mon cher,” said Bilíbin following him, “I have been
“Do you understand what you’re saying?” he said in a trembling
dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from the
dragoons. In the center, where Túshin’s battery stood and from which
draw breath.
drawing room. And, in fact, Bilíbin’s witticisms were hawked about
dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he
dressing gown looked out.
dressing gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.
drew his saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, opening
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first time
drink?”
driver’s leg. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,
drooping as he broke into a gallop.
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
dull eyes looked at him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark
duty. The Emperor is gracious, and I shan’t forget you if you deserve
dying of fright. I did, ‘pon my word, I got that frightened!” said
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although his
eager questions from all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing
easy. And tell me, please—I’ve been meaning to ask—how is he
easy to take marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but
“Eh? What?” asked Prince Andrew.
Ekonómov.
elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been
elegantly. Bilíbin’s services were valued not only for what he wrote,
embarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkóv there suddenly
embarrassing situation, and the expression on his face was invariably
Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems
Emperor Francis would have been fulfilled long ago. I should long
Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince Auersperg’s
Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take
emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
“Encouraging us to get along quicker,” said another uneasily.
ended with a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and a Cossack, riding
end of his gun...” a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said
enemy’s horse patrols could be discerned.
enemy three times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.
engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides military
entered.
entered the room.
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvítski and another adjutant
entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up
entrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon
entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.
escape, and Bagratión’s four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,
escape it anyhow.”
especially after having dined, Bolkónski felt that he could not take in
established intimacy with the French marshals, and so dazzled by the
estime que je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j’avoue que
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
“Even if it were a great deal of trouble...” answered Prince Andrew,
evening light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with
evening. There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to
evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctive
even more so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and
ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had lived with the
Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidently
Every muscle of Telyánin’s pale, terrified face began to quiver, his
“Everyone has his Achilles’ heel,” continued Prince Andrew.
everyone’s situation. Tout comprendre, c’est tout pardonner. * Think
everything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he
everything was becoming more and more happy and animated. “Oh, how I
every time a ball flew past. Rostóv on the left flank, mounted on his
evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
evidently in the village itself and behind the hill. To the left from
evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and
evidently those in front had halted. All remained where they were in the
evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to
exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen—one
excellency!”
excellency?... nobody knows.”
excellency’s participation in the common action is highly valued by
except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundred
except veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his
excitedly animated and healthy men.” So thinks, or at any rate
excitement.
excitement, around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking
exclaimed in excellent French.
exclamation he was asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the
“Excuse me, General,” interrupted Kutúzov, also turning to Prince
executing of the plan.
expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance
expecting that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which
explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
exposed. Another emissary rode to the Russian line to announce the peace
expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate us on the victory! Admit
expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of
expressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unless
expression. “C’est... c’est du Mack. Nous sommes mackés (It is...
expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.
expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and
expression—the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At that
externally was all in order, but had it pleased the commander in chief
extrémités de l’univers, nous allons lui faire éprouver le même
eyes.
eyes.
eye socket. “Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men’s
eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising
eyes. Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him,
face.
face and just nodded to him with his long head. But after it was
face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom—he had to
face as if driving off a troublesome fly. “And why are you stopping
face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
face. “Let him see whether I am a coward!” he thought.
face looked worn—he too had evidently not slept all night. He glanced
faces. (He distinctly saw an old French officer who, with gaitered
faces of the crew bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood
faces, the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostóv,
failed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where it was
fallen!”
fallen, and an old trooper on the flank, a noncommissioned officer who
familiar voice. “One is afraid of the unknown, that’s what it is.
familiar voice, “what I say is that if it were possible to know
family’s, and his friends’, and the enemy’s intention to kill him
“Fancy, with his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!”
“Faster!” came the word of command, and Rostóv felt Rook’s flanks
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. After crying she had fallen
     fate—(the fate of the army at Ulm).”
father-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she
father in order to puzzle or test his sister.
“Father Kutúzov.”
father’s ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
father’s study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone. All
fear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never
feared him.
fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
fearing to relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.
feeble voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regiment roared,
feeble voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and
feeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill-suited to
feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single sentiment, that
feeling of sickening agitation.
feels, anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives
feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the
fell from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the
fellows have all lost your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help
felt coat, stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the
felt perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge.
felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far
Ferdinand disgraces himself. You abandon Vienna, give up its
fetch the Frenchman, Moreau,” he said, alluding to the invitation made
feu, et oublie celui qu’il devait faire faire sur l’ennemi!” *(2)
feverish delirium or drunkenness.
field glass and shrugging his shoulders, “so it is! They’ll be fired
field. Instead of the moving horses and hussars’ backs, he saw nothing
fighting cocks preparing for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs
fight. You’ll see—we shall retire.”
fine cords would soon get a bit rubbed,” said an infantryman, wiping
    * Fine eyes.
fine,” said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under
fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to
finished.
finished phrases of general interest. These sayings were prepared in the
fire, fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns
firing incendiary balls at the village of Schön Grabern visible just
firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff where they
firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a
first not only what had been said but also what Kutúzov would have
first place because her provinces have been pillaged—they say the Holy
first time since their encounter concerning Telyánin. Rostóv, feeling
fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he
five in the afternoon,” replied Bolkónski growing more animated and
five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and
fixed straight on his son’s. Something twitched in the lower part of
flank,” he said to himself, “the Kiev grenadiers and the Podólsk
flank. In the center Túshin’s forgotten battery, which had managed to
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
flourished his castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers,
flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
flung it down and began:
followed by a Cossack.
followed by the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer who
following passage, in German, from the Archduke Ferdinand’s letter:
following the mass movements and general orders, and constantly studying
foot to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped
for a few seconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador
“Forage has not been supplied to the extent...”
for a seat.
forehead.
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
“For God’s sake... I can’t walk. For God’s sake!”
for him.
for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those
formed the picket line on either side, there were many curious onlookers
“For me? For me?... Trying for me!...” said she.
former position. A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number One, holding
forming up within twice the range of a musket shot. The general in
for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the
“For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman’s apron strings.
for Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but
for the good we have done them.’ Father took her when she was homeless
for the hussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from
for the most part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an
for themselves.
for the two approaching battalions. While he was speaking, the curtain
(for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
for this failure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village
for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was in store
fortnight’s retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after a fight
     * “Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies
forward, and experienced great happiness.
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,
forward. “Company commanders!” he shouted in a voice accustomed to
“Forward, with God!” said Bagratión, in a resolute, sonorous voice,
forward with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot. From
for your obstinacy,” said Kírsten.
found.”
four thousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim
“Fo’ward, with God, lads!” rang out Denísov’s voice. “At a
Francis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before the
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through
freckled gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All
French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and the
French. But this adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that
French column, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill.
French forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a
French, he did not know. There was no one near.
Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostóv closed his eyes and stooped
Frenchmen, and though but a moment before he had been galloping to get
French since Suvórov met them. He feared that Bonaparte’s genius
French, smoke appeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots
French, there would be great hope of saving the army; to let the
French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
French to suppose that here—in the center—the main Russian forces
French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading, and thus
Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his
friend.”
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
frightened here?” and the artilleryman understood him.
from behind.
“From Dürrenstein to Krems.”
“From General Field Marshal Kutúzov?” he asked. “I hope it is
from him, and Rostóv felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried
from him. “He used to have a predilection for Bacchus.”
from him. “There, you see!” and he drew attention to the bullets
from Hollabrünn) received Murat’s dispatch with the proposal of a
from Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle and
from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in the
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
from the ranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on
from the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company,
From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander in chief and
from various people and retelling the town gossip.
From Vienna Kutúzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew’s father.
from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the
“From where to where, Your Majesty?”
from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.
front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emerge
front line, as if their differences would be settled there amongst the
front of the ranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the
fugitives returned, the battalions re-formed, and the French who had
gaiety with which Zherkóv spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
gaily, with a wide swing of his arm.
galloped on to the village where he was told that the commander in chief
“Gave him leave? Leave? That’s just like you young men,” said the
gave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other side
gazed at Bolkónski silently with wide-open eyes.
genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
general!”
General.”
general expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the
“General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure...”
generally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two
general—of whom Austria has so many—and to lay down all this heavy
generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
general were talking in low voices and Kutúzov smiled slightly as
general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlóvski was
general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no
“Gentlemen, I’ll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me,”
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go,” replied Prince Andrew
gentlemen, messieurs les maréchaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard,
gentlemen of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kurágin,
‘Gentlemen,’ says one of them, ‘you know the Thabor Bridge is
“Get in,” said Kutúzov, and noticing that Bolkónski still delayed,
get there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot
“Get well soon, lads!” he continued, turning to the soldiers.
gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
“Give him a seat,” said Túshin. “Lay a cloak for him to sit on,
“Give me a biscuit, you devil!”
give me satisfaction...”
“Give me that letter,” said Kutúzov turning to Prince Andrew.
given him by the commander in chief and his fellow officers, Prince
given to blow it up. Otherwise we should long ago have been in the
gives the singles and snatches the doubles!”
giving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagratión and welcomed him as
giving him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join
“Glad to do our best, your ex’len-lency!” came a confused shout
glancing for support at an officer of the suite who turned away
gleamed.
gloomy gravity and glancing round at his comrades, “there is an order
“Go and apologize, your excellency. Yes, go!”
goes up to Auersperg and says: ‘Prince, you are being deceived, here
“Going?” And he went on writing.
going to the cottage he occupied with Denísov.
going toward the door without raising his eyes. Denísov paused, thought
“Gone? That’s all right!” said he; and looking angrily at the
“Good-by.”
“Good-by, my dear fellow,” said Túshin. “Dear soul! Good-by, my
     * “Good God, what simplicity!”
“Good health...”
good horse, Bedouin, and sitting as though falling backwards in the
“Good news!... Go on!” he shouted to the driver, and they galloped
good news? There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was
good news, though Schmidt’s death is a heavy price to pay for the
“Go on, go on!” said the major.
goot to come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don’t
got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too
go through your performance.”
“Gott, wie naiv!” * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
Grabern. On the left our troops were close to a copse, in which smoked
grandfather, wore it in all his wars.” (She still did not take out
Grand! Look at the smoke, the smoke!” exclaimed the artillerymen,
granted.
grapeshot.”
gravity!”
gray overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing,
greater part of the enemy’s opened out from this battery. Just facing
greater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and
great favor to ask of you.”
great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed
great sin. How can one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling
grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
grieved him and yet he was pleased.
grieving at the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely
groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, while
groans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the
ground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
group of men with yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord,
growing louder and more frequent. Evidently our guns had begun to reply.
guard.
gun, a horse), from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of
gun carriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack
guns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the
guns on the hillock.
gut Morgen!” * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased
habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagratión kissed him on the
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which
had always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm.
had apparently been running), “and I did so wish to have another talk
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutúzov.
had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour
had been put in position?”
had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
had been struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face,
had come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed, with
had crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, but
had evidently been drinking.
had fallen the previous day—the day of the battle. Reviewing his
had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the corner
had foreseen. Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke
had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces
had happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him, and
had never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters
had not finished saying what was necessary, thudded into the ground near
had no time. He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid
had not only held the field but had repulsed the French. Though the
had not worn for a long time, he went into Bilíbin’s study fresh,
had not yet come home when Rostóv rode back early in the morning from
“Hadn’t I better ride over, your excellency?” asked Nesvítski.
had persisted in his request to Kutúzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His
had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. There
had stopped beside the dead men, ran to catch up his line and, falling
had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of
Ha, ha, ha! Mary!”
half-closed eyes gave still more persuasiveness to his words. The staff
hand. And there,” he pointed to a sutler’s tent, “they crowd in
hand he drew Bagratión toward him, and with his right, on which he wore
hand. “How did you get here?” said he, turning to Zherkóv.
hands....”
hands. “Just fancy, he didn’t let me win a single cahd, not one
hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
harder from behind.
has beaten the Germans. They beat no one—except one another. He made
“Hasn’t been in since the evening. Must have been losing,”
has picked up an ax: “We are used to it, but you, sir, will blister
have it, young man, I’m going.”
have something to eat.”
have to call in the French, so that birds of a feather may fight
“Have you a complaint to make?” Kutúzov asked with a slight frown.
“Have you told them to bring the horse?” asked Telyánin, getting up
having become entangled in the saddle. Where our men were, and where the
Having cleared the way Denísov stopped at the end of the bridge.
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. “Where, on which side, was now
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked
Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms
having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front
having mounted drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the
Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where the
having ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with a
Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtaking
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince
having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he
head.
head and an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
he added as if speaking to himself.
he added: “I need good officers myself, need them myself!”
headlong to the horse. “Walk him up and down, my dear fellow,” he
head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
head sadly, pointing them out to the Austrian general with an expression
“Health to your ex... len... len... lency!” and again all became
“He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he’s getting
heard, and much farther to the right beyond the dragoons, the officer of
heard on every side.
heart. “It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!” was what
he, as if bragging of having been frightened.
He asked, “Whose company?” but he really meant, “Are you
“Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine,” muttered
heavy convoys (whose movements were concealed from the French) advance
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the
He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry
he commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that
He could not finish, and ran out of the room.
He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer and
“He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth.”
He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.
he feels sure he will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone
he had been beside the gun, he had heard the voices of the officers
he had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel.
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor’s wife and
he had ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor
he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have
“He has been set down. He died,” replied someone.
“He has weported himself sick, he’s to be stwuck off the list
“He higher iss dan I in rank,” said the German colonel of the
height on which the Kiev regiment was stationed, in the hollow where the
height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the heavy
He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwing
he immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was in
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved
“He is a great tactician!” said the prince to his son, pointing to
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,
“He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,
“Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,
he met Nesvítski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkóv;
he must retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear,
he noticed everything...”
he only gave an order to cease firing and re-form, so as to give room
     he ought to be firing at the enemy.
He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ball
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detached
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.
he raised both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious
Her brother shook his head incredulously.
here? Don’t you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron
“Here, in that house,” answered the adjutant.
here is one from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are
“Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army,” thought Bolkónski,
(He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a
he repeated, accentuating the u: “I think, however, now that he lays
here’s another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours,” he
“Here’s something for you to report,” said Zherkóv. “See if I
here. Where is it?” he asked, turning to Lavrúshka.
her eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. “Sit down,
her forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and
her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.
her neck.
heroism!”
her sister-in-law’s room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked
her. Why do you say all this to me?”
he sad at leaving his wife?—perhaps both, but evidently he did not
He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking
he sat under fire. But despite himself, on his face too that same
He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.
“He’s coming!” shouted the signaler at that moment.
He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speaking
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked
“He shouldn’t have taken so many men,” said the officer of the
He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son
He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostóv let go of
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his
he turned away.
He turned round. Nesvítski’s handsome face looked out of the little
He turned to Kozlóvski with urgent questions.
he understood his commander’s wish.
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned
“He wants to see a battle,” said Zherkóv to Bolkónski, pointing
he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.
he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of
He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words in
He woke up...
he wondered as he got up: and at that moment he felt that something
he would give an opinion at the war council which would be the only one
he would have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian
“Hey, Cossack, my horse!” he said. “Now, then, you there! get out
high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and
highest point. “It’s in charge of the queer fellow we saw without
highest spheres.
“Highly satisfied, your excellency!”
high time!”
hill.
hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdánich Schubert, came
hill opposite, with the French moving about on it, opened out before
him.
him.
him and everything he could say had long been known to him, that he was
him be here....”
him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His
him but to the whole regiment—all of us—you’re to blame all round.
him by the arm, “I believe that intervention will be stronger than
him, he’s a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!”
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
him. “More, please: more! What’s he saying?”
him not in the least abashed.
him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:
him pleasure. The enemy’s guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes
him. “Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
himself fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know
himself into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, “Why
himself, Prince Bagratión sent Zherkóv to tell the general in command
himself to Bagratión. Bonaparte’s adjutant had not yet reached
himself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commander
himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained
him that there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and
him to come up; Prince Bagratión reined in his horse and recognizing
him to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were.
him. “What is this? They’re like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the
hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar. He
Hippolyte, and began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
Hippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, “without
his arm.
his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers’ song, commencing with the
his boots. You can see everything from there; let’s go there,
his captain.
his excitement. “Don’t you understand that either we are officers
his eyes. “Can they be French?” He looked at the approaching
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left
his father who had brought it from the siege of Ochákov. All these
his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvítski, who had been sent to
his glittering black eyes at Rostóv.
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
his head.
His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the
his horse keep pace with the company.
his horse with a convoy officer’s saddle.
his horse. Zherkóv and the staff officer bent over their saddles and
his instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence
his in the diplomatic service.
his life. He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled
His Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the splendid
His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance...
his mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a bird
his muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself to his full
his musket walked away.
his own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded
his own house. The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the
his own way, gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumor
his private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers
his reputation fighting them.”
his riding whip.
his room.
his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was in
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into the
his skill?” he concluded.
His son only smiled.
his suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince
his temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty
His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always
historical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the
his weak figure. “Number Two!” he squeaked. “Fire, Medvédev!”
his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a
hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted “Cavalry!” and
“Hm... Hm...” muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he
“Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!” came peals of such healthy
“Ho, ho!” said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.
holding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of the
hollow and were firing at our men. Prince Bagratión bowed his head as a
hommes massacrés et l’armée de nos alliés détruite, et vous
honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in
hoofs, and apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let
hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
“H-o-o-w are you standing? Where’s your leg? Your leg?” shouted
horse for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
horses and the infantry collecting wood.
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
horse still struggled.
horse you’ll thank me for.”
hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
Hostilities are ended, we can shake one another’s hand.... The
house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. The
house with Prince Bagratión and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian
“How am I?” Dólokhov answered coldly. “I am as you see.”
How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
“However, there will hardly be an engagement today,” said Bagratión
“How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!” Rostóv
“How many miles?”
“How’s it you’re not drunk today?” said Nesvítski when the
“How’s this, Colonel?” he shouted as he approached. “I told you
“How thoroughly like him that is!” he said to Princess Mary, who had
how to escape?”
How you look at things! Send two men? And who then would give us the
humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week’s time he might,
humming infantry as by a frame.
hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to and fro, throwing
Hungarian?” said the commander with an austere gibe.
hung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing
hungry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army
hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglers
“Hur-a-a-a-ah!” came a roar of voices. “Let anyone come my way
“Hurrah—ah!—ah!” rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, and
     Hurrah for Emperor Alexander!”
hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tying the
hurriedly up to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door.
hurried off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.
hurrying past them.
hussar and began lifting him.
Hussar cornet Zherkóv had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to
hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole
hussars, but still with that naïve air that made it impossible to know
hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on
hussars, flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, “so
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The men
“I...”
“I...”
“I also wanted to ask you,” continued Prince Andrew, “if I’m
I always stick to mother truth. It’s not right!”
I am afraid of him.”
“I am going away.”
“I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if
“I am not jesting,” Bilíbin went on. “Nothing is truer or sadder.
“I am not jesting with you; please be silent!” cried Bolkónski,
“I am not your ‘dear sir,’ Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell
“I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not
I am sorry for that,” he went on.
“I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are
“I cannot argue about it,” replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only
“I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o’clock the battle began at
I can’t...”
“I can’t. I’ve sworn not to. I won’t drink and won’t play till
“I can’t make out at all,” said Nesvítski.
I can’t,” replied Bolkónski, smiling.
“I come from the archduchess’. I heard nothing there.”
“I confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic
“I did not expect this of you,” said the staff captain seriously and
“I did not... What is it all about?” inquired Prince Andrew
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
“I’d like to put you on a two days’ march with a knapsack! Your
“I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Másha, or blamed
“I don’t at all say that all the plans are good,” said Prince
“I... don’t...” he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap.
“I don’t know, General....”
“I don’t like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all,” said Prince
“I don’t myself know ‘to who,’” replied the cornet in a
“I don’t say it’s a plan I approve of,” said the son; “I am
“I don’t understand!” said Prince Andrew.
if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander
If a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the
“If at least we had some women here; but there’s nothing foh one
if but one stage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the only, and
“If he” (he meant the enemy) “begins popping at the bridge now,”
if he intended to say something, but immediately, with affected
“If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a
If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will
“If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won’t break my neck...
“If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come.”
“If I were Tsar I would never go to war,” said Nesvítski, turning
If not it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of
“If only they would be quick!” thought Rostóv, feeling that at last
“If we get to Vienna I’ll get rid of it there but in these wretched
“If we live we shall see,” replied Bilíbin, his face again becoming
“If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself,” he said
I get reinstated.”
“I have.”
“I haven’t been in the room. It must be where you put it.”
“I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. And
“I have seen as much before now, mate!”
“I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quite
“I have the honor to present myself,” repeated Prince Andrew rather
I have written that he should make use of you in proper places and not
“I hear you have given orders to harness,” she cried, panting (she
“I know,” interrupted Bilíbin, “you’re thinking it’s very
“I know it and shall prove it,” said Rostóv.
“I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work,” said
“I know who has taken it,” repeated Rostóv in an unsteady voice,
“I’ll flatten you into a pancake!” shouted the angry officer to
I’ll flog you all.”
ill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmütz, and Olmütz is a
“Illness or not, he’d better not cwoss my path. I’d kill him!”
“I’ll really call in on the nuns,” he said to the officers who
“I’ll show you, I’ll show you! It’s not a secret. And it’s a
imagined only important possibilities: “If the enemy attacks the right
“I’m glad,” answered Dólokhov briefly and clearly, as the song
“I’m glad, glad, to see you,” he said, looking attentively into
immediately.”
immediately.
immediately brightened on seeing Rostóv. “Schön gut Morgen! Schön
immediately broke off. The door of the private room opened and Kutúzov
“Immediately, Prince,” said Kozlóvski. “Dispositions for
immense force upon Kutúzov’s line of communication with the troops
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
“I’m not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of
impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander in chief.
impassive face?” Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince
impatiently.
impending action. From privates to general they were not expecting a
important post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador
“Impossible!” cried Prince Andrew. “That would be too base.”
impression. “But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me,” he
impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-off
impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the
improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
“I must have that purse, I tell you,” shouted Denísov, shaking his
in accord with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that
inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began
“In an hour’s time, I should say.”
in attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagratión. He now
inaudible, voice.
“In a word, a hearty one...” said the subaltern, laughing (the
in Bonaparte’s address to his army at the beginning of the campaign,
In Brünn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy
incessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince
in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the
in chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know these
increasing, seemed like someone’s breathing. He listened intently to
indication of something new and stern showed round the mouth.
indifference, began to hum to himself, producing a queer sound which
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The
in discussion with the sole object of offending one another. But the
inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are
in exactly the same manner. Nesvítski laughed and nudged the others to
infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It
infantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of
inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected.”
informed him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the
“Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!” said the colonel
in French out of all this, showing all the news we have had of the
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the
“In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane
inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray
in his horse, said to him:
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
in his saddle.
in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
in no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass,
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of
In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly
in only his stockings, rose when they entered, smiling not altogether
inquiringly at the young prince, wondering what would follow.
in separate piles, began counting them.
insoluble.
in spite of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the Austrian
In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilíbin did not forget to
instantly dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested
instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps
instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and ran with all his
in step, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be
instructions to Major Ekonómov, he could not help taking notice of the
intellectual pride,” said the princess, following the train of her own
intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. The general looked the
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
interested the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was
interests,” said Bilíbin.
in the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to
in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven
in the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well he
In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing
In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was
In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck in
in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him.
in the meadow behind the village, three of them are dragging something.
in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible—and now he
in the military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilíbin gave
In the passage Denísov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold
in the same tone.
in the same tone.
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of
in the sutler’s hut without his boots.” He recognized the agreeable,
in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matters
“Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how
in too”—different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked
into step with a hop, looked back angrily, and through the ominous
into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the
in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowing
in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those many
invincibility of the French, and the Minister of War does not even care
involuntarily came closer to him.
involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be
in which Kutúzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and
“I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!”
“I request you to have the goodness to change your coat,” he said as
irresolution communicated itself to the men.
is a mob of scoundrels and not an army,” he was thinking as he went
“I saw you riding this morning...” he added.
“I say, come round some evening and we’ll have a game of faro!”
“I say, Fédeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You
“I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;
“I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,
“I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts,
“Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?” asked Dólokhov.
“Is it worth while noticing trifles?” He reined in his horse with
is not so, then...”
is now rushing along the road to Brünn and will be here in a day or
is pua’ as on the fihst day of cweation... Who’s that now? Send him
is so fond of?” He remembered his mother’s love for him, and his
is so I don’t know...”
“Is there sufficient forage in Krems?”
is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no longer fit for
it?”
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
it and saw Telyánin’s horse at the porch.
it. But at that moment an adjutant galloped up with a message from the
it can’t be a square—for they are not drawn up for that.”
it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.
I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same
“I tell you,” shouted Denísov, “he’s a fine fellow.”
it. Feel in your pockets.”
it had the commander in chief continued to look at him, and so Kutúzov,
“It has begun. Here it is!” thought Prince Andrew, feeling the
“I... that’s different. Why speak of me? I don’t want any other
it is a bit of Mack. We are Macked),” he concluded, feeling that he
“It is an illness, there’s no other way of explaining it,” said
“It is now my turn to ask you ‘why?’ mon cher,” said Bolkónski.
it is said ‘There are thieves among the Pávlograd officers!’ But
“It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince,” said the staff officer.
“It’ll be worse for you. Bogdánich is vindictive and you’ll pay
It’ll be worse if he fires the bridge. See, here’s an officer jammed
“It may be treachery,” said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the
“It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will
it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schön Grabern
it or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them all.
“It’s a bad business, eh?”
“It’s a bad business,” said the general without answering him,
“It’s all over; but I am a coward—yes, a coward!” thought
“It’s all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there’s
        “It’s a long, long way.
“It’s ancient history,” said another, guessing that it referred to
“It’s a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
“It’s as if a dam had burst,” said the Cossack hopelessly. “Are
It’s as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose. Besides, suppose
“It’s different on different days,” answered the captain. “One
itself?”
its last march the day before—presented a well-ordered array of two
it’s not all the same to us! Am I not right, Denísov? It’s not the
“It’s nothing,” replied Prince Andrew.
It’s not pleasant, but what’s to be done, my dear fellow? You landed
“It’s not there.”
“It’s not true!”
It’s too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French army!”
it. Telyánin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the
it to be alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire,
it under your head like a treasure,” said Rostóv. “I put it just
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out
it was evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
“It was the officer, your honor, stained it,” answered the
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the
it were not his. He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find
it won’t be your skirmishing at Dürrenstein, or gunpowder at all,
“It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsarítsin
it!’ ‘Yes, let’s!’ say the others. And off they go and take the
Ivánovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his
“I’ve been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil,
“I’ve come to say good-by.”
“I’ve seen him myself!”
“I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse,” said
“I was attached; I’m on duty.”
“I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could
“I will allow no one to call me a liar!” cried Rostóv. “He told
“I will do it all, Father,” he said.
“I will the bridge fire,” he said in a solemn tone as if to announce
“I will, your excellency,” said Timókhin, showing by his smile that
jabbering! Fine, isn’t it? It’s all the Frenchy can do to keep up
jerked away his plate, which Tíkhon briskly caught. “Suvórov!...
jests and gossip.
jest was unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.
jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the
joined Kutúzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army, and
joins the Allies, Austria’s hand will be forced and there will be war.
joke, and purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was.
jokes, sit on the cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian
joy to give my Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the
jump, Túshin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun,
junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,
just above his ear.
just as at Ulm... it is...”—he seemed to be trying to find the right
Just as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, and
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvítski and Zherkóv, there came toward
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
just come out of a hot bath.”
“Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!”
“Just see where it carries to!” a soldier near by said sternly,
Just then Zherkóv entered the room.
“Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls
Kaiser Alexander hoch!” *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by
Karl give no signs of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutúzov
keep from laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked
keep you long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember
kept turning his horse in front of the squadron.
killed and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you—as I
killed.” Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his
kill me.” But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if
kind, because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says:
“Kind...ly let—them—pass!”
“Kindly let this cart pass. Don’t you see it’s a woman?” said
“Kindly return to your posts,” said the staff officer trying to
kindly, smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvítski could hardly
kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of
kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and
King Francis is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor
Kírsten. The staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a
“Kiss me here,” and he touched his cheek: “Thanks, thanks!”
knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with
knees, some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass.
knocked three of them over.
knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon
know that ourselves!” Another, without looking round, as though
know! The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are
“Know this, Másha: I can’t reproach, have not reproached, and never
Kozlóvski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
Kozlóvski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
“Kurágin is exquisite when he discusses politics—you should see his
     *Kutúzov.
Kutúzov bowed with the same smile.
Kutúzov chose this latter course.
Kutúzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had been
Kutúzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over
Kutúzov, he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brünn.
Kutúzov’s expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were
Kutúzov’s face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
Kutúzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the
Kutúzov’s whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited
Kutúzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had
Kutúzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were
Kutúzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few
Kutúzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces. The
Kutúzov went out into the porch with Bagratión.
Kutúzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,
Kutúzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.
lackeys who care nothing for their master’s business. Quarante mille
lad,” he said, addressing his favorite soldier. “And where is the
“La femme est la compagne de l’homme,” * announced Prince
lain in ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly.
Lannes and was thrown into confusion. Bagratión had sent Zherkóv
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and
latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found
laugh.
laugh. And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvítski did not learn who
laughed.
laughing.
laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
Lavrúshka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and under
“Lavwúska!” he shouted loudly and angrily, “take it off,
lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the
leader, called les nôtres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively of
leaf, gave it to Kozlóvski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw
leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with the impetuosity he
learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
left...” A fat major skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of
left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time
left but to die?” he thought. “Well, if need be, I shall do it no
left him, rubbing his small white hands.
legs and turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince
Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte’s stern letter,
let him do what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Bugler,
letters that had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of
letter to Murat:
“Let them pass, I tell you!” repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his
let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
letting the retreating companies pass by them, when a soldier came up
letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.
“Let us go, Iván Lukích,” he said to the captain.
“Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denísov about
“Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or—go and wake and I’ll
liberty not to believe me and I don’t even care whether you do or
lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his
lieutenant general, our dear Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself.
life, all alone—for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what
life, and can’t, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young
“Lift it two lines more and it will be just right,” cried he in a
light blue Viennese calèche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawn
lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that
like a bird than a man.”
like a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
liked to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both,
likes her way of reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads
line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks,
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
line, for from where they had been before it had been evident that it
line—the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. The
lingered for a moment.
lips.
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
Listening to Bilíbin he was already imagining how on reaching the army
“Listen!” said he; “don’t worry about your wife: what can be
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
little towns there’s nowhere to spend it,” said he. “Well, let me
Little Túshin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to
little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying round the piles of
loading.
locality and surroundings—fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled roofs,
“Long ago,” answered Rostóv, “I have already been for the hay,
longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was
Look at me,” cried Denísov who, unable to keep still on one spot,
“Look at them scurrying! It’s burning! Just see the smoke! Fine!
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one’s fingers after a
looked at Telyánin. The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way
looked straight at his adjutant’s face without recognizing him.
looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
looking at his watch.
looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,
looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyes
looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvítski
looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a calèche.
looking round at the sound.
looking with dismay at her husband.
“Look! Look there!” one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a
“Look, Prince,” said another, who would have dearly liked to take
“Look sharp! Look sharp!” several voices repeated around him.
losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,
loudly, handing Kutúzov an envelope.
luck! Such ill luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo
luck the man has!”
luggage. Franz, Bilíbin’s man, was dragging a portmanteau with some
l’u! * I shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilíbin
lying on the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were
Mack. An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on
Mack, have by now already gained a decisive victory and no longer need
Mack’s arrival... What’s the matter, Rostóv? You look as if you’d
made elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say
makes things trying for you, doesn’t it?” Prince Andrew asked
make them look at the wag.
“Malbrook s’en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra.” *
manly voice interrupting them both. “Of course you artillery men are
man’s penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkónski’s
man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness. As soon
man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking
many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostóv who was crimson with
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his
marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and
Maria Theresa Order of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring
     * “Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he’ll
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,
mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvítski saw the rapid, noisy
matter might be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
“Matvévna’s” carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar
“Matvévna,” the gun from which they had removed the dead officer.
may Christ be with you in your great endeavor!”
may laugh as much as you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great
Meadow.”
mean to fight, let’s fight. But the devil knows what this is.”
meanwhile Kutúzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the
Meanwhile Nesvítski, Zherkóv, and the officer of the suite were
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to
me apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks it
medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he
meditatively and rapidly:
me I lied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me
member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
men should be in their greatcoats and in marching order, and that the
men should continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed
men uselessly, and so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilíbin, their
me!” Rostóv whispered.
metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?” retorted Prince Andrew
me to burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders
me! What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
Michael Ivánovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and
“Michael Ivánovich!” cried the old prince to the architect who,
Michael Ivánovich did not at all know when “you and I” had said
might outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same
might toward the bushes. He did not now run with the feeling of doubt
miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm
mind easy,” said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
mind. “If a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God,”
“Mind, walk him up and down well!”
mined?”
mined and doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its
minister’s bent bald head with its gray temples. He went on reading
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutúzov when he was in
moment.”
moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he
moment marching with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutúzov’s
moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparent
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two
monk he received and had a long talk with.”
more animated. Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and
Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvórov had had a free hand; but
more cheerful in his presence, and were evidently anxious to display
more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in
more than Timókhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental
morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see one
most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach
mother!...”
motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was
mountains, defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and
mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad
mount and ride to the bridge. (Observe that all three are Gascons.)
mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. A
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,
mouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket,
mouth full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age....
mouth!” said Bilíbin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian
movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready,
movements of the Austrian army, and then give it to his excellency.”
movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim
movements were still slow and measured.
“Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?” screamed the
“Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven’s sake... Protect
Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all
Murat’s detachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagratión’s
Murat’s emissary and retired, leaving Bagratión’s division
must have an explanation...”
must have pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
“My dear fellow, how are you?” said he through the singing, making
“My dear fellow, you are a hero!” said Bilíbin.
my men in the wood. I beg of you, I beg of you,” he repeated, “to
name.
NAPOLEON
Napoleon’s army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him
narrowed disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with
nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it
nearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,
nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still
nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed. Our
necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.
neck instead.
neck. It seemed to Rostóv that Bogdánich was only pretending not
need to hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction
negotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days’ truce.
Nesvítski.
Nesvítski and Zherkóv were so surprised by this outburst that they
Nesvítski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated
“Nesvítski, Nesvítski! you numskull!” came a hoarse voice from
Nesvítski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.
Nesvítski. “They’ve made up splendid packs for me—fit to cross
Nesvítski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again
Nesvítski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
never take it off. Do you promise?”
never thought much of him.”
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first
Nicholas Rostóv turned away and, as if searching for something, gazed
night.”
night long without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and
night, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out
“No.”
“No, but imagine the old Countess Zúbova, with false curls and her
“No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands...
“No, friend,” said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a
“No, gentlemen, no... you mustn’t think... I quite understand.
“No, if I hadn’t thought of it being a treasure,” said Rostóv,
“No, it can’t be helped, lad,” said the prince. “They’re
“No, I tell you.”
“No, it’s a sprain.”
no longer a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the age
no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and
nonintervention. And...” he paused. “Finally one cannot impute the
“No, nothing.”
nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end.”
“Nonsense!” he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood
No one had given Túshin orders where and at what to fire, but after
“No, on my word it’s not obstinacy! I can’t describe the feeling.
“No—promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble
“No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she’s much to be
no sky but only an atmosphere.”
Nostitz, the Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed
not a diplomatist. That’s why I joined the hussars, thinking that here
“No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!”
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
“Not at all,” said Prince Andrew.
“Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacré nom...!” cried he angrily.
“Not bound to endure insults,” Dólokhov concluded in loud, ringing
not, but you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole
not captured.” Again he pondered. “I am very glad you have brought
not evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he were
not exist.
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
nothing about firing it.”
Nothing could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn’t there something to
“Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle.”
“Nothing... only a shell...” he answered.
nothing when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians
“Not hurt, Petróv?” asked one.
noticed the French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot
noticing what a bad state of things it was. The regimental commander
not, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders
not leave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from their
“Not let the wife have him?” said the old man, and laughed.
not listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and three
“Not on any account!” exclaimed Rostóv.
“Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schönbrunn, and the count,
not rise. Rostóv also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache
“Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light,” replied
not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon
not used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the
not worse than this one.”
“Not yet. But where are you off to?”
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.
not you! Go back or I’ll flatten you into a pancake,” repeated he.
now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing
“Now look out for the ball... we’ll throw it back.”
now,” said another.
“Now, Sídorov, you have a try!”
“Now then, go on, go on!” incited the officer, bending forward and
“Now then, let’s see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!”
“Now then, Matvévna, dear old lady, don’t let me down!” he was
“Now then, you devil’s puppet, look alive and hunt for it!”
now,” thought Rostóv driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go
“Now what does this mean, gentlemen?” said the staff officer, in
Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafening
object above his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly
obviously strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be
occupy the position and prepare for an attack.”
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
of a battle but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement.
of affairs?” concluded his father. “But it troubles me. I don’t
of a gun at Ismail.
of an attack spread through the squadron. The command to form up rang
of a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by
of a ruling prince, in a crown—an alleged descendant of Rúrik and
of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
of being afraid roused him again. “I cannot be afraid,” thought he,
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
of columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, and of
of command.
of communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
“Of course. I’m going into action! I’ve shaved, bwushed my teeth,
“Of course. What is it?”
of cowardice in the other. Both passed the examination successfully. As
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
of expression and intonation that obliged one to listen to each
of expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the
off completely and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he
of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his whole being. Rapidly
offended tone.
offend me. Really I have some,” Rostóv repeated.
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
off his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
officer arrived, but at a sign resumed his measured, monotonous pacing.
officer as in a looking glass—started, moved forward, and answered:
officer has stolen...”
officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving
officer joined in the colonel’s appeals, but Bagratión did not reply;
officer of the suite by the arm. “Look! A man has fallen! Fallen,
officer pointing to the soldiers. “The officers don’t keep them in
officers,” continued the staff captain, “and Bogdánich” (the
officer sends for Auersperg; these gentlemen embrace the officers, crack
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
officer’s remark was just and that really no answer could be made to
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
officers who had been standing together rode off to their places. The
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
off on the line of Kutúzov’s retreat. If he reached Znaim before the
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
of him, listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince
of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamed
of it. Prince Andrew” (he always spoke thus of his son) “has been
of Lannes’ sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and
of Mack’s defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was
of Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before the
of men and horses, from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy’s side
of other things and to look in other directions, thought only of what
of profound thought. The round, steady, hawk’s eyes looked before him
of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments
of sixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhagen, and now held a rather
of smoke that had concealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began
often heard from his fellow hussars.
often heard. “What is this?” thought Prince Andrew approaching the
often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement.
of that song.
of the action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment and
of the actual battlefield. They began to meet wounded men. One with a
of the army into the hands of a better informed and more skillful
of the Azóv and Podólsk infantry and the Pávlograd hussars—was
of the colonel, Nesvítski, Zherkóv, and the officer from the suite.
of the commander in chief’s special favor he was sent with the news of
of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy, but the
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground. Though he
of the French were coming down upon them and that his regiment was in
of the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their
of the river.
of the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
of the second gun’s crew was “uncle”; Túshin looked at him more
of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
of the third company!”
of the way! Make way!”
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
of this set.
of Túshin’s battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind
     of whom you have made a friend, but not for you, not for
of wounded pride, and a hope of glory. “And should there be nothing
Oh, Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have,” said she, sitting
“Oh, every bullet has its billet,” answered Váska Denísov, turning
“Oh, he is so kind!” answered Princess Mary.
“Oh, he’s all right, a good horse,” answered Rostóv, though the
“Oh, I must give you a treat,” Bilíbin whispered to Bolkónski.
“Oh! I thought you were in your room,” she said, for some reason
“Oh, it’s wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you
“Oh, leave off!” said the accountant with a beaming but rather
“Oh, my bower new...!” chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet
“Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!”
“Oh, my dear fellow, we’re in such a stew here these last two
“Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!” he exclaimed in German. “What a
“Oh! Oh!” groaned Nesvítski as if in fierce pain, seizing the
“Oh! Oh! Oh!”
“Oh, well, well!” remarked the regimental commander. “Still, one
“Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!” cried several voices.
“Oh, your excellency!” said Franz, with difficulty rolling the
old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing
old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
“O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect
on.
on account of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearer they got to
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who
on at the crossing. And why are they dawdling there?”
on both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it
“Once again, Colonel,” said the general, “I can’t leave half
on duty every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make
one but the Emperor of Russia has that right.
“One!” came the command.
“One can’t write so fast, your honor,” said the clerk, glancing
one foot, from the orderly and began to mount.
“One moment, your excellency.”
“One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew’s face
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
“One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing
“One thing I ask of your excellency,” Dólokhov said in his firm,
one word after another, came through the open door. She was speaking as
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself
one would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying—so let him
on him. The Empress’ chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The
on his saber, and put on his cap.
on his side of it.
On Kutúzov’s staff, among his fellow officers and in the army
only change being that the words “Father Kámenski” were replaced by
only his eyes were brighter than usual.
“Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!” said
only telling you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now,
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the
On November 1 Kutúzov had received, through a spy, news that the army
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news
on purpose to vex us. The Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
On returning from the review, Kutúzov took the Austrian general into
“On the contrary,” he said, in a querulous and angry tone that
On the evening of the last day’s march an order had been received that
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose,
‘on the march’ it meant in greatcoats?” said he reproachfully to
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from
“On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!”
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew.
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutúzov with his army crossed to the
On the way to his sister’s room, in the passage which connected one
on this high ground, shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and
    * “On vous fera danser.”
on which Rostóv sat.
“Oooh! For Christ’s sake let me alone!” cried the wounded man, but
opposite, in front of which large masses of French were advancing.
or cap, his head was bandaged, and over his shoulder a French munition
order.
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always kept
orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.
orderly, running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
orders the sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break
other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
other had ridden up to him.
other officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am
others...”
others.”
other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard a
our aid,” said Kutúzov.
our dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders.”
Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
our men had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the cavalry
“but it must be brought to a head. The day after tomorrow will be
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
But Milorádovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything
“but nothing more would come of it. There will soon be a battalion of
but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery,
But our stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy’s
But Rostóv did not reply.
“But she’s stupid. I have myself said she is stupid,” he thought.
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her
“But tell me, what is he like, eh?” said Prince Andrew again.
“But that’s the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. His
“But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he
button of his waistcoat.
but when he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto
But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
but why, whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out.
“But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being so
by a far more serious matter than a desire to show his contempt for
by a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna
by Bolkónski—an adjutant of Kutúzov’s, who’s a friend of mine.
by Borís arrived at the palace to find Dolgorúkov. Everyone at
By evening, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts of the
by its gray dress. “But no! Why did this thought never occur to me
by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
by the fire. One of them stumbled.
“By the way, your excellency, I should inform you,” he
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
By “what was due from the Ryazán estate” Prince Vasíli meant
called him this morning?”
called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.
“Calm yourself, my dear. I will go to my father,” she said, and went
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
came with the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came
“Can a sleigh pass?” he asked his overseer, a venerable man,
can both fall on his flank and pursue him over the plain between
Can it be possible?” she thought, not daring to look at his face, but
cannon aimed at me?”
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone
cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it
can say all this there,” remarked Dolgorúkov.
can’t bear those old men! Eh?”
can’t be! Only to get past them quicker, quicker!”
can’t understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only
“Can you imagine it?” and he began describing how the Guards, having
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
carabineers.
care, this was a mere stranger. Glancing, however, at Borís, he saw
carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother...”
carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
carry them out, so he takes a regiment, a division—stipulates that no
catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel begins to creak and joins
cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle;
cavalry in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the
cavalry was brought in, convoyed by a sótnya of Cossacks. Evidently the
celebrating awards they had received for the campaign, and made
center of the table, Prince Vasíli attracted everybody’s attention.
center, the reserves, and Bagratión’s right flank had not yet moved,
certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
certainly should not, speak like that,” their glances seemed to say.
certain. There’s Lise, married to Andrew—a better husband one would
chair regardless of her governess’ remarks. After dinner, she rushed
chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
“Charge!” shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to
charitable to my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for
chattering voices had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess
chessmen with his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg’s move,
chief’s and with the exception of Prince Bagratión, who declined to
chief’s room.
chief, your excellency?” said Rostóv, with his hand to his cap.
child. “But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly,” she thought.
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life’s happiness
circumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not merely one
clavichord was. “It’s no use your going to the commander in chief.
clock. One wheel slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third,
cloths.
clouds gliding slowly across it. “How quiet, peaceful, and solemn; not
coachman’s, was teasing Kutúzov’s old cook whom Prince Andrew knew,
coachmen and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to
code, but under this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by having
coiffure, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s and Anatole’s smiles, and the
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
column advanced into action.
column coming up to meet the Ápsherons.
column marches... The third column marches...” and so on, read
column, Milorádovich’s, the one that was to take the place of
columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one
“Come, dear princess,” said Mademoiselle Bourienne, “just one more
“Come here, Wostóv. Let’s dwink to dwown our gwief!” shouted
come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at
“Come later.” And she went in, closing the door behind her.
come on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion’—and
come, were all there at the appointed time.
coming action from Dolgorúkov. He felt that Kutúzov was upset
coming. And Nicholas, who had vainly suffered all the dread that
“Coming, friend.”
coming to us of their own accord,” incautiously remarked the little
commander in chief.
commander in chief. Bagratión knew that as the distance between the two
commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly,
commander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perish with
commander in chief’s suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement
commanders. And then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through
commanders are: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de
commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,
commiseration on Rostóv, who saw that Túshin with his whole heart
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
company, your honor. I don’t know where... such bad luck!”
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
comrade Berg’s best wishes for success, rode to Olmütz to see
concentrate. “There we shall encounter difficulties, and there,”
concentration of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the
conclude our campaign and we can return to winter quarters, where fresh
confidence, flatter him, become intimate with him, and finally make his
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five
confused him still more. He stood before Bagratión with his lower
confusion what did or did not happen?
conscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality. He
conscious of the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the
conscious that another line of thought had sprung up, and while thinking
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she
constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly
contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objections
continued—remembering Dólokhov’s conversation with Kutúzov and his
continued, “we owe today’s success chiefly to the action of that
correct, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had
Cossacks and then the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry
coughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to see
could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would
could have been devised. This combination of Austrian precision with
could not break away from her, and that though it would be a terrible
could not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face.
council, he remained in the room.
Councilor of State, and insisted on the young man accompanying him to
Count Bezúkhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of
“Count! Count!” shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager
countess.
countess. Her son’s growth toward manhood, at each of its stages,
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
“Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son?” asked Dolgorúkov.
Count Markóv? Count Markóv was the only man who knew how to handle
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment
“Count Rostóv.”
countrymen. Thanks for the fire—we’ll return it with interest,”
Count,” said Berg, lighting his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.
Count Tolstóy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in
couple of words with him, Pierre felt unable to disappoint him.
courage, but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near
course.” Perhaps he did not really think this when he met women—even
courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll’s hand.
crackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.
creaking of her corset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty
crimson float on the surface of that milky sea of mist. The whole French
crossed the road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the
cross it and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the
crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of
crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jammed in
crying.
dark corner. And this someone was he—the devil—and he was also this
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.
darkness. “Why not?... It might easily happen,” thought Rostóv,
dark... Steady!” he cried to his fidgeting horse.
daughter!”
daughter.
daughter, and while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said:
daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!”
daughter-in-law, “but she need not make a fool of herself, she’s
daughter.)—“My dear boy... Lëlya... I am very pleased.” (His
daughter of Prince Vasíli, but visualized her whole body only veiled
daughter’s happiness.
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.
day before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent
day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the longed-for moment of
days’ march and the enemy’s outposts after a brief interchange
days was still thin—moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on
days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
day until then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any more
dear general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after military
“Dear me, how you have changed!”
deceitful German, whom he would not only kill with pleasure but whom
deceived you. Let us go to Mamma.”
decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from him
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke’s courier to
Decide, my dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a
deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved.
defile through narrow village streets when we are marching against the
delay and advised waiting for something else before advancing had been
“Delightful!” said Bolkónski. “But I have come to you, Prince,
delightful to see.”
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
Denísov, and now Moscow memories—and he again hurriedly opened his
“Denísov, don’t make fun of it!” cried Rostóv. “It is such a
Denísov’s a fine fellow. But that’s all nonsense. The chief thing
Denísov’s horse, Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and
Denísov, who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some
Denísov with his voice and mustache, and Telyánin and all that affair
depends on your decision. Never mind me!”
derision. “I ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I’ve
descent lit up, and facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a
descriptive part of the letter. “And what a soul! Not a word about
desirous of hiding her adoration for Hélène and inclined rather
despair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.
“Despite my great respect for old Kutúzov,” he continued, “we
detachment, moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing
detail! No, my dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones
“Devil take ‘em!” he muttered, while his head was still covered by
devoid of any foundation. Prince Bagratión turned to the old colonel:
devotion to the sovereign, Rostóv pictured to himself an enemy or a
dictated the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he arrived
did I come here?” he wondered.
did neither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other
did not, for instance, say to himself: “This man now has influence, I
did not interest her—or by a silent look and smile which more palpably
did not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
did not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guides
did not wish to, believe that.
“Didn’t I tell you,” she went on, turning reproachfully to
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
different one from that which he had ridden at the review, and bending
different tones. Rostóv reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre’s happiness. The old
diplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of the
directed to—Pierre and Hélène. Prince Vasíli mimicked the sobbing
direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into
discipline and zeal in the service. He brought with him into our
disconcerted. The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world
dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteries
disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire
disorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: ‘I’ll let them
displease you. However,” he added rising, “you know my name and
disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering
dispositions...”
“Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and
dispute.
dissatisfaction and reproach. “Old though he may be, he should not, he
dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor’s headquarters
distance, but down the hill before him. “It’s the French!”
distance where no one had been before him. Bagratión called to him from
distant, most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he remembered
distinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak
distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men, who
distrust in Bolkónski’s emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully
Dmítri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
doing!” said the officer and rode off.
“Do I remember Nicholas?”
Dolgorúkov; and though you may not know it, the fact is that now
Dolgorúkov laughed merrily.
Dolgorúkov, looking round at Bilíbin with a smile.
Dolgorúkov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just
Dolgorúkov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate
Dolgorúkov to the Emperor.
Dolgorúkov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had
Dólokhov—now an officer—wounded in the arm, and on foot, with
Dólokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge
dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.
done up.
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let every
“Don’t be unkind,” cried Anna Pávlovna from her end of the table
“Don’t come in,” she said to the old count who was following her.
don’t know and never shall know, for the love of these men here,” he
don’t remember Borís. I don’t remember him a bit.”
don’t understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know.
“Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the
door? Oh, she is a pearl among women, Princess,” he added, turning to
     do, Sire.”
“Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a
doubt it now. Rostóv rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which
doubt of victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the
down, and smiled affectionately.
down below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon
down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading,
dowry and take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She’ll be the
“Do you hear how he’s walking?” said Tíkhon, drawing the
“Do you remember him?” Natásha suddenly asked, after a moment’s
“Do you want anything?”
dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he saw our
drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave
drawing room with her habitual skill. The large group, in which were
dressed, at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to them,
dressed gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, fresh, only slightly
dressed. Princess Mary’s self-esteem was wounded by the fact that
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
dress her would prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her
dress, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s ribbon, Princess Mary’s unbecoming
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these amusing recollections of
driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty
drove his huge spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail
drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the
dry hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
Duke Constantine Pávlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostóvs
Duke’s orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
eagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied
easy.
“Eh, brother! They’ve all bolted long ago!” said the soldier,
“Eh, is anything hurting you?” asked the soldier, shaking his shirt
“Eh, is she pretty?” he asked with a wink.
eighty thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of
either the place they were leaving or that to which they were going.
elbows, as if to say: “You can tell me your views later, but now be so
elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shoulders
else.
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
else the Tsar did.
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
embracing Prince Vasíli.
Emperor Alexander hurriedly to Kutúzov, glancing courteously at the
Emperor Alexander’s visit to Potsdam, and of how the two august
Emperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over
Emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him
Emperor Francis continued to look about him and did not listen.
Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At midday
Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeing him,
Emperor,” said Rostóv, and was about to spur his horse.
Emperor’s arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there
Emperor’s eyes met Rostóv’s and rested on them for not more than
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced young man, sat very
Emperor,” thought Rostóv.
Emperor was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm,
employed by lively chatty people, and consisting in the assumption
Empress’ Field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor
Empress’ Field,” said he clearly and distinctly.
encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced
end spurred his horse.
enemy?”
enemy under the Emperor’s command. Commanded by the Emperor himself
enormous whole.
enough, at the end of the feast proposed the Emperor’s health. “Not
“Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
entered, as if to say: “Yes, that’s how I want you to look.”
entered the room. Prince Vasíli approached first, and she kissed the
entering the house occupied by Kutúzov, asked for Bolkónski. Prince
entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and
entertaining supposition.
enter the drawing room? Even if I like him I can’t now be myself with
enthusiasm—was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the
entice him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm,
erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier’s obsequious expression on his
erect on his handsome black horse, looking about him in a leisurely and
especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
Essen corps arrived and Prussia took our side.
estate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not
evening.
evening in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.
even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why,
even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. It
even more merrily than on the previous night. Denísov celebrated his
Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently
even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our Horse Guards,
even wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended
ever because Anatole’s presence had vividly recalled to her the time
ever was Borís resolved to serve in future not according to the written
every advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where the
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
Every day he said to himself one and the same thing: “It is time I
everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do
everyone he could stop, but got no answer from anyone.
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around, or
everything!” (He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his
everything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, none
everything over with, and I happen to be there, I’ll go at once, to
every word and movement was described with ecstasy.
evidence of the advantages of attacking that what had been discussed
evidently did not realize what they were doing.
evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew
evidently forced. Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting at
evidently weakened, was undertaking nothing.
evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. “I
exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what
“Exactly, not a hair’s breadth farther,” answered Prince Vasíli,
exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages
excellency... I had no men... your excellency.”
Excellency Prince Vasíli Kurágin and his son, I understand?” she
excellency. Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?” replied
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
except to Pierre and Hélène, whose presence he seemed not to notice.
exclaimed, and immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking
expeditions to Olmütz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian,
experience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battle
exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no
expresses his opinion to Kutúzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors.
express his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy
expression of her father’s. His face wore that expression when his
expression, though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie
extends along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there,
extraordinary intelligence, the more so as in the depth of his heart it
eyes and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
“Eyes front!” Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
eyes. He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian
eyes he was every day more and more connected with her, that it was
eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared—now the Emperor, now
eyes. What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and imperturbable
false. He was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
familiar to Rostóv; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments, till at
farther into the region where the army was already in action.
farther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostóv no longer
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
father and Andrew. I shall be so happy when she is his wife. She is so
father and Anna Mikháylovna, that it had something to do with her
father, Count Bezúkhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Hélène
father, he feels for you.”
father... It’s bad....” he reflected, but while he was thinking this
father’s room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to
father with a laugh.
fault!” and her voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.
fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible.”
feelings. But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked, much
feel,” thought he, “if she saw me here now on this field with the
feet into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing
feigned—or so it seemed to Rostóv. He put his horse to a trot to
fellow.”
fellow,” he said abruptly and eagerly, “I must confess to having
fellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything!”
festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostóv came that sun shedding
field of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and
fighting army (with the Pávlograds on the right flank of the front);
fighting hussar who had been under fire.
figure of Túshin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him.
final instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
finds you to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you
“Fine fellows, the Pávlograds!” remarked the Emperor.
“Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!” he said. “Well, come and
finger at him, “I have even heard of your doings in Paris!”
fingers twitched nervously.
fired in the air; a third was striking the horse Kutúzov himself rode.
fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole
fire! Our stories have some weight, not like the stories of those
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Túshin,
firing in the valley. Not a single muscle of his face—which in those
firing?” Rostóv kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian
first regiment roared “Hurrah!” so deafeningly, continuously, and
flag let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on the
flank; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the very
flank now that it is nearly four o’clock and the battle is lost?
flanks was more than six miles, even if the messenger were not killed
flattered by this. Anna Pávlovna arranged the different groups in her
fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and
floundering silvery fish in the watering can, on that dam over which for
flung it away. Tíkhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The little
fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,
fluttering in that light. Túshin had not returned, the doctor had not
fly! Gracious me, they did rattle past! It’s time I knew the Imperial
followed by their suites. Kutúzov, affecting the manners of an old
followed proved that the commander in chief at that moment was absorbed
followed was like the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower
follows:
food.
foolish as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte’s
“Fool... or dummy!” he muttered.
foot, and galloped on.
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasíli gave
foot, which he was then touching with his own under the clavichord.
for!”
for about a minute.
for a long time, always in the same fog, descending and ascending hills,
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
for an answer. His birth and position in society were not bad. “Well,
force had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes
forehead, over which was beautiful light-brown hair smelling of pomade.
foreign cavalry with red epaulets, probably French. He could see nothing
foresight for every eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
forgot the sovereigns’ presence. “Lads, it’s not the first village
for her. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald
for him, Prince Bagratión sat at dinner, talking with some commanding
for himself. He remembered his mother’s last letter. “What would she
for his life, but for the courage he needed and which he knew would not
formed.
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
Formerly in Anna Pávlovna’s presence, Pierre had always felt that
forming a complete whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body
for more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approach
For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never tell anyone, but, oh God!
for the next battle are planned by him alone. Nominally he is only an
for trees and gullies for men and continually discovering his mistakes.
fortune. Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a
“Forward, lads!” he shouted in a voice piercing as a child’s.
for wine.
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same
français,” said Dolgorúkov, with grave satisfaction. “Good,
frankly, I don’t want to. I am speaking of the staff in general.”
French!”
French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers
Frenchman remembers his bayonet and stabs him....”
French to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and
French) to Prince Vasíli. “It’s not as at Annette’s * receptions
French troops who are being raised in France will join us, and the peace
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.
“Fr... fr...” snorted Prince Bolkónski. “The prince is making a
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,
friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold
“Friendship laughs at distance,” began Prince Vasíli in his usual
From all sides reports reach me,” etc.
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who
from Denísov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron—that is,
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up
from headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostóv
from him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might
from his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him.
from his son.
from Másha, the lady’s maid, the necessary report of how handsome the
from my heart as to an old acquaintance.”
From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began
from the army to Sergéy Kuzmích, in which the Emperor said that he was
“From the direction, it must be the enemy,” repeated Rostóv.
From the direction of Olmütz in front of them, a group was seen
from the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal
from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,
from the masses around them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
from which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to be
front.
front and back. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre,
front of the infantry, who had to wait.
front of us.
frowning.
frowning and silent.
frowning and taking his daughter’s hand; he did not kiss her, but only
fulfill Thy will?” And scarcely had she put that question than God
full speed. Rostóv, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on
gaily.
Galicia he had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter
galloped up to Kutúzov and asked in the Emperor’s name had the fourth
galloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with disordered
gave her the answer in her own heart. “Desire nothing for thyself,
gave no answer, she left the room.
gazed at his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners
gaze drooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.
‘General Bonaparte.’”
general conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with
general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was
general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. “Oh, the
general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affected
generally do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been,
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
general movement; that something was constantly expected of him, that if
general roar.
generals.
generals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether he
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the
generals were saying.
general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a
general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all
gentle childlike smile, and Hélène smiled too.
gentleman—evidently not sharing Borís’ conception of the advantages
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
gentlemen changed his position on seeing Borís. The one who was writing
“Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically:
“Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow—or rather for today, for
gentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the
“Gently, gently! Can’t you do it more gently?” said the Emperor
Germans.
Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been
Germans’ muddling! What stupid devils!”
get married. What about you? That’s what I want to know.”
getting up and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.
girl,” he sometimes said to himself “she never makes a mistake,
girl would be decided that evening. The visitors were seated at supper.
give no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
given receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening
“Glad to do our best!” shouted the soldiers.
glad, very glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so.
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the
glanced at Berg with a smile.
glancing at Prince Vasíli and at her father with her beautiful eyes.
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signet
glide across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that
gloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm.
“Go across to our hosts: they invited you,” added Borís.
God be with him,” thought he, relishing his own goodness of heart,
“God be with you, general!” said the Emperor.
God, without Whose care not a hair of man’s head can fall?
going on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand
going on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
going. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible to
“Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed the
“Gone to bed?” asked the prince.
good as to look at the map and listen.” Langeron lifted his eyes with
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. “But you see... another
“Go on! Go on! Give it them!” he mentally exclaimed at these sounds,
go? That way is nearer.”
go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him about you. We shall
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
“Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!”
“Go, Tit, thresh a bit!” said the wag.
go to him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of
gown, he went to the couch on which he slept.
grant.” Nor did he say to himself: “Pierre is a rich man, I must
gray everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie,” she said
great; all he could hear was: “ahahah!” and “rrrr!”
great deal from the deceased,” said Prince Vasíli to him, handing him
great man! Let us drink to his health and to the certain defeat of the
great many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody
greeting was riding quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment in front
grew still kinder. The younger sisters also became affectionate to him,
grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army
ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one might
grow imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
growing ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.
grown furious, now at Borís, now at Bolkónski. “Yes, many stories!
Guard and line regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among them were grooms
Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place
Guards passed Rostóv before he heard them shout, “Hurrah!” and
Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.
Guards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
guest. “Poor girl, she’s devilish ugly!” thought Anatole.
guidance. The universal experience of ages, showing that children do
gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while
guns smashed, and no supports at all.”
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
had also convinced the sovereign Emperors of.
had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent.
had a splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne’s toilet which rendered her
had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte.
had been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed
had been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or
had broken up the French troops.
had come into Pierre’s room after the funeral. With drooping eyes
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
had first learned to say “pear” and then “granny,” that this son
had followed him like an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received
had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely understood that
had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite
had not left Prince Vasíli’s and felt with terror that in people’s
had not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorúkov’s demand to
had ridden up to him in a violent passion, shouting: “Arnauts!”
had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
had slept badly that night, those around him reported. The cause of this
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.
ha!” laughed Prince Bolkónski, and Anatole laughed still louder.
half-closed eyes he looked at Rostóv, bowed slightly and wearily, and
halfway. Fine orders!” was being repeated on different sides.
halted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming the
halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to
handful of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can’t be that, it
hand in passing and draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his
handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers.
hands asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Véra, Natásha, and
hands high, shied, throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
hands. Then, sighing, he added: “My son’s fate is in your hands.
hands which show the time, so the result of all the complicated human
hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
    * “Hang these Russians!”
happening in front of him. Nesvítski with an angry face, red and unlike
happen!” she said, looking at herself in the glass. “How shall I
happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longing
happiness. The old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own—such as she had
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
“Hardly,” said Bagratión. “I saw them this evening on that
harnessed and packed the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and
has blundered looks at an examiner.
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
“Has the snow been shoveled back?”
have been as good as Weyrother’s, but for the disadvantage that
have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to
have done the same!...” thought Princess Mary.
have killed so many that there’d have been a heap of them.”
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
have stayed longer.”
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
“Have you?” he said. “Well, how did it go?”
Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men,
having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and in
Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw either our own or
having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressing
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostóv stopped the
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostóv, to avoid
having passed Uvárov’s cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon
having rested after yesterday’s march, were sitting, clean and neatly
head. As he rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Borís
he added that Prince Vasíli was also there. When Tíkhon came to her
head in perplexity—perhaps because the banner really interested him,
head, laughing with an officer who had sat down beside him. A third was
headlong after Anna Mikháylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
headlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might lead
headquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached
headquarters in the morning and had started the whole movement that
headquarters was still under the spell of the day’s council, at which
healthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. “And why
he always thought only of whatever he was engaged on.
heard.”
heard, and again something in his face twitched—“That is just why
heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars
heard distinctly.
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
heard them, and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is
heard this Sónya blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable
heard, your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor.”
hearers—who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
hearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him.
heated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the
“Heaven knows what a fright might do.”
He began the rescript again and again, but as soon as he uttered
He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
he consoled himself. “And besides, what have I done to bring it about?
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything as
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another
he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many people, but if he
(he did not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before his
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmütz that day, but the appearance of
he did not look at them: he looked only at what was going on in front
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and
He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his
He enlivened the whole party. The wax candles burned brightly, the
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he
he. “Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for
he got his wound. This pleased Rostóv and he began talking about it,
he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief, he could not,
he had not thought about it until that moment. The officers’ laughter
He had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,
He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as
he had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian
he had said absent-mindedly: “Yes, she’s good looking,” he had
he had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him something
He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,
“He has forty thousand men at most,” replied Weyrother, with the
he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,
he himself was pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the
heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very well
“He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call
“He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow,” answered
“He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of
He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman’s uniform, all these
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really
held. All the commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in
held the hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful
He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpátych stood with
Hélène, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were
“Hélène!” he said aloud and paused.
Hélène nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He
Hélène sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, a
Hélène’s hand several times. After a while they were left alone
Hélène smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit the
Hélène’s presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed
Hélène still sat talking just as before.
Hélène, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome
Hélène turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend’s eyes, evidently
help being aware of it, just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once
help, would inform her.
He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It
He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was past
he need only have bent his head a little to have touched them. He was
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung less
her and for himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
her beauty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in
her companions’ not having the least conception that it could be
“Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
here,” came the voice of an hussar, past whom Rostóv was riding in
he reflected, “there is no riding round it now. I must look for the
“Here he is at last!” shouted Rostóv. “And Berg too! Oh, you
here is now settled, and I ought to have been off long ago. Here is
“Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come,”
“Here it is!” thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and
Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and
her friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant
her handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
her heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of men
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.
her?” said the old prince angrily. “What an idea! I’m ready for it
herself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds
her white teeth. She met Prince Vasíli with that playful manner often
her with perfect sincerity, and with the naïve and firm conviction
He said something more, but Rostóv did not wait to hear it and rode
he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where
he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now to say
he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed into
“He’s dead—why carry him?” said another.
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
he shouted, “and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion
(He smiled ironically.) “But even if he also took up a position in
he spread a map on the table. “All eventualities have been foreseen.
he thought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural
He touched his horse and having called Milorádovich, the commander of
he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the
he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormous
he was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor to be
He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men came
he was riding was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign,
he was sent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasíli is her
he was sent. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that
he was told in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who
He went straight up to Prince Vasíli.
He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
He wished to explain to Dolgorúkov a plan of attack he had himself
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter
he would certainly be taken prisoner. Kutúzov remained in the same
he would expand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good
he would into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray, now there
He would say a lot of pleasant things, ask you to dinner” (“That
he would slap in the face before the Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout
hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commander in chief’s
higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was
high—I always said....”
Highness,” and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was
him and did not stop but rode on and on, continually mistaking bushes
him and Hélène. “Well, what of it, if you all know it?” thought
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.
him. “And why should she marry?” he thought. “To be unhappy for
him, but still that happy result always remained in the future.
him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him.
him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across
him if not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying. But the
him merged in Rostóv’s mind into a single feeling of terror and pity
him. On the day of Prince Vasíli’s arrival, Prince Bolkónski was
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued
him. Prince Vasíli’s two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked
him, push him, do anything but kiss him—a thing everybody did. But
him. Rostóv was particularly in need of money now that the troops,
himself?
himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness to
himself, he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went
himself.... Not a word! About some Denísov or other, though he himself,
himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning but
himself, was shouting to Kutúzov that if he did not ride away at once
himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived
him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone
him.” The mere thought of her father’s look filled her with terror.
him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible
him to deliver.
him to hear something more, nodded and turned to him with a cheerful
him too, just opposite Gúryev’s house... Old Gúryev.... Oh, but
him. You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!”
him ‘Your Majesty,’ but who, to his chagrin, got no title from
hints began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at
his beautiful daughter Hélène.
his being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or
his camp,” said he. “What does that mean? Either he is retreating,
his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair,
his daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel
his eyes he heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the long-drawn
his face, gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression.
his hand.
his handkerchief, and again: ‘Sergéy Kuzmích, From all sides,’...
his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.
his head.
his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, but
his head, and with inimical politeness lurking in the corners of his
his head he let it droop and again closed his eye.
his horse indolently and carelessly. Rostóv recalled their quarrel of
his last parting from his father and his wife; he remembered the days
his lower jaw.
his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the caprice
his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskóy. More than
his own superiority. It was as if he said to them: “I know you, I know
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he
his ship is sailing, but on the day of battle—heaven knows how and
his shrill, harsh voice. “The road is not swept for the princess my
his son and seizing the little princess’ arm as if she would have run
his speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
his Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How it would come about he did not
his typically southern French face during the whole time of the reading,
his usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
his wife said—met for supper at Prince Vasíli’s. All these friends
“Hm!—his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the
“Hm! Hm!” muttered the prince, sitting down.
holding up a threatening finger. “He is such a worthy and excellent
“Hold your tongue, Pétya, what a goose you are!”
Hollabrünn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position we
home. Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
honorable, Count,” or, “Were he as clever as you,” and so on,
honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the
honor of the French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.
hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
hoping to find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line
horse a little in front of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills
horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to
horses and Ilyá Iványch. I don’t think Ilyá drives anyone except
horses in horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old,
horses were already galloping. Rostóv heard the thud of their hoofs
horse with his spurs, and giving it the rein leaped lightly over. Only
hours’ sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute,
How am I to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to
“How am I to understand you, mon père?” said the princess, growing
“How can one talk or think of such trifles?” thought Pierre.
“How can the Emperor be undecided?” thought Rostóv, but then even
How did it begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasíli. Then there
However, at nine o’clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable
“However, if you command it, Your Majesty,” said Kutúzov, lifting
“However, I think General Kutúzov has come out,” said Prince
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
“How is that?...” began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting
how is that?” said different voices.
“How it will be there I don’t know, but all will be well!” thought
How quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself
“How she loves me!” thought Princess Mary. “How happy I am now,
how they had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke
“How understand me!” cried her father angrily. “Prince Vasíli
“How was it a gun was abandoned?” asked Bagratión, frowning, not so
“Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!” cried Prince Bolkónski,
humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselves
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
“Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!” thundered from all sides, one regiment
“Hurrah!” rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
“Hurrah!” shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up
“Hurrah!”... Then the general march, and again “Hurrah! Hurrah!”
hurriedly interrupting Bagratión.
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
“I am afraid for the baby,” she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne:
“I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkónski,” repeated
“I am not talking about you,” he said, “I don’t know you and,
I am overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that
“I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing about
“I am waiting, Your Majesty,” answered Kutúzov, bending forward
“I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove...”
I can do.” And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
I did not think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you?
I do not begin, sire, because we are not on parade and not on the
“I do not know what you think, Father,” whispered the princess.
“I don’t know. I think if he writes, I will write too,” she said,
I don’t want him.” (He looked at his blushing daughter.) “Are you
If at first the members of the council thought that Kutúzov was
if complaining of Kutúzov.
“If he could attack us, he would have done so today,” said he.
If he is standing before Brünn...”
“If he starts a row I’ll go away,” said Prince Anatole. “I
“If I’d been in Nikólenka’s place I would have killed even more
“If we fought before,” he said, “not letting the French pass, as
if we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we
“If you like, your honor!”
“If you really want it,” said he.
“I had not the pleasure of seeing you,” said Prince Andrew, coldly
I had to express my own desire...” She had no time to finish. The old
I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all
“I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
“I have had a proposition made me concerning you,” he said with an
I have received what was due from the Ryazán estate and will keep it;
“I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,”
“I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I’m not going to
I know you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better
I’ll go to the general and ask him.” He readjusted himself in the
I’ll let her see....”
I’ll see.” The old prince snorted. “Let her marry, it’s all the
I’ll teach you to think!” and lifting his stick he swung it and
    * “I love you.”
imagining himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly
immediately told him that this man could be useful, and without any
immensity of the power they constituted.
“I’m not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles,” said
impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
Impossible!” And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself
impossible for him to return to his former conception of her, that he
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
impression. Whether Dolgorúkov and Weyrother, or Kutúzov, Langeron,
in a bad temper, and in the morning Tíkhon had already advised the
In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and
In a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and more
in, and sinking heavily into an armchair.
in chief’s office were gathered Kutúzov himself, Weyrother, and the
inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.
in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
     * “Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to
“Indeed? Yes, yes!” said Borís, with a smile. “And we too have
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: “Voilà Marie!” Princess Mary
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and
indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted
indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.
indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by
individual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and our
I need.” But when he came across a man of position his instinct
“I never invited them. They came to disturb my life—and there is not
infantry.
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of
influence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and
informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn
in four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to
in French.
in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away.
in front of him was misty darkness. Rostóv could see nothing, peer as
in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen constituted
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
in good spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field
in her eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasíli
in his fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for
in his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face,
in his horse before the Emperor.
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
in love. The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract his
in love with the Tsar,” he said.
in me. I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her
in military matters.
innocent youth.
in November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him
In November, 1805, Prince Vasíli had to go on a tour of inspection
inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troops were
in on bad company. Rostóv flushed up on noticing this, but he did not
in our army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now
In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere of
inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
inquiring what she was to do with these people. On leaving them, Anna
insignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and
in silence, and then the same joke was repeated.
inspired by the Emperors’ presence were eager for action. The
In spite of Prince Andrew’s disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.
intended to take up our position and begin the action, but were on this
intention of proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Túshin from under his brows and his
interview? Why negotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat is
“In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack,” said
in that happy mood in which everything seems possible and everything
in the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the
in the assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna
in the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken.
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This
in the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
In the Emperor’s suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed
In the Emperors’ suite were the picked young orderly officers of the
In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
in the evening,” reported Rostóv, stooping forward with his hand at
In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shots
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants’ rooms that
In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: “You cannot imagine
in the mist.
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was
in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.
In the rearguard, Dokhtúrov and others rallying some battalions kept up
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from
into action as arranged, and after going behind other columns for
in to inform the commander in chief of this and, availing himself
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
into sobs.
into the corridor and met—coming out of the door of the Emperor’s
Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting that
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
into the valley. He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave
intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some important and
involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on.
in Zherkóv, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all
I only wanted to know your opinion,” and Anna Pávlovna let Pierre go.
“I quite understand,” answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile.
irresistible human need for sleep. He really was asleep. Weyrother, with
“I saw him myself,” replied the man with a self-confident smile of
“I saw the Pávlograd hussars attack there, your excellency,” chimed
“I say, Berg, my dear fellow,” said Rostóv, “when you get a
“I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?” Anatole asked,
“I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the
“I say, we’ve been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!” said
is good to have a friend like the prince,” she said, smiling at Prince
I shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.
I shall expect you, Drubetskóy. Au revoir!” exclaimed Prince Andrew,
“Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind—yes,
is interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking,
“Is it for visitors you’ve got yourself up like that, eh?” said
is much better than ours.”
is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad woman!” He had often begun
is nothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to
is not my fault that I want it and want nothing but that and live only
“Isn’t she exquisite?” she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately
is, stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but
is such men as he who decide the fate of nations,” added Bolkónski
“Is that so? And what did he say?” inquired Bolkónski.
is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and wished to say
is vanity, all falsehood, except that infinite sky. There is nothing,
“It can’t be!” said Rostóv. “It must have been someone else.”
I tell her how I’ve seen the Emperor?) Natásha... take my
I tell you he is in our hands, that’s certain! But what was most
it. Fr... fr... fr! And don’t I see that that idiot had eyes only for
“I think I may congratulate you,” whispered Anna Pávlovna to the
“I think the battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstóy and
“It is all very well for Rostóv, whose father sends him ten thousand
“It is done!” she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
it is past midnight—cannot now be altered,” said he. “You have
“It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
“It is too late now, it’s done; besides I love her,” thought
“It may be he or it may be nothing,” muttered the hussar. “It’s
it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
it, next day, November 15, after dinner he again went to Olmütz and,
“I told you it was all lumps and holes!” the little princess
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
I trouble myself about you, and you also know quite well that what I
“It’s a lackey’s job!”
“It’s all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to
it’s definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt.” Pierre
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it
It seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
it seemed to him that he was being fired at. “What? What? What?... Cut
“It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are
itself, a petty German town, Rostóv saw the Emperor again. In the
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors’ approach, had naturally burst into
“It’s not that I don’t remember—I know what he is like, but not
“It’s plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince,” said
“It’s the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
“It’s wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last
it to its destination and make use of it.
it was impossible to get rid of them.
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmütz
It was long since the Rostóvs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter
“It was my fault, mon père,” interceded the little princess, with a
It was nine o’clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a sea
It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander
it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had
it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid
it were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment”), was
it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment? At a time of such
it would have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and
“It would have been hard to drive up, your honor,” he added. “I
It would not ache—it would be well—if only they did not pull it, but
I’ve nothing against it,” the prince said to himself, “but he must
“I want nothing, and I won’t be anyone’s adjutant.”
I was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
“I was there,” said Rostóv angrily, as if intending to insult the
“I will do so,” said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.
“I will give the order.”
“I will, I will, only tell me! You won’t? Then I will go and tell at
“I will tell you frankly,” said Prince Vasíli in the tone of
“I won’t say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be
“I won’t tell anyone!” and she ran off at once to Sónya.
jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter: “I don’t know... your
Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and the animation was
“Je vous aime!” * he said, remembering what has to be said at such
joy and happiness. On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting:
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable
Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the military
just left.... It is true that it was hot there,” he added, modestly.
just such a story—they would either not have believed him or, still
Just then at a distance behind Kutúzov was heard the sound of regiments
keen-sighted a companion. “You know, you see right through people.
kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikháylovna, with the letter, came on
killed by a cannon ball—struck in the breast before our regiment.”
“Kill the Germans!” shouted one.
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us.”
kindness,” or, “With your excellent heart,” “You are yourself so
kind, that is the chief thing,” thought Princess Mary; and fear, which
kissed him three times.
kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne’s hand. (This was not etiquette, but
kissed Princess Mary’s hand. She did not know how she found the
kiss me,” and he offered his cheek.
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
knew till after eight o’clock.
knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
knitting a striped scarf for him.
knoll; if they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too....
know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position of
know my principles—everything aboveboard! I will ask her tomorrow in
Kutúzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
Kutúzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the
Kutúzov laughed bitterly.
Kutúzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied:
Kutúzov’s, collected in groups and began to talk about the awards,
Kutúzov’s headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns.
Kutúzov’s suite like a flock of little birds.
Kutúzov, there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The
Kutúzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall
Kutúzov was occupying a nobleman’s castle of modest dimensions near
Kutúzov, where he inquired for Bolkónski, all the adjutants and even
Kutúzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing. Everything is
Kutúzov, with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward a
Kutúzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over
Kuzmích, asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it
“Kuzmích... From all sides... and then tears,” someone repeated
lad’s a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now.” He took
“Lads! here’s to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over
“Lads!” shouted Milorádovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
Langeron’s objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief
Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother’s vanity
Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support
large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual round
large, newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people
last interview with the gentleman-ranker—“that Private Dólokhov,
last Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
last only his white plumes were visible to Rostóv from amid the suites
Late that night, when all had separated, Denísov with his short hand
latterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasíli’s house
laughed loudest.
laughing.
laughing for some reason and shaking himself free.
laughing, “‘Sergéy Kuzmích... From all sides... From all sides...
lazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders from
leading the Tsar’s beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
“Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to
left foot began convulsively tapping the horse’s side with the spur,
Lëlya’s name day. I will invite two or three people, and if he does
less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostóv.
letter.
letter.
letter.
letter from home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk
letter, he now was.
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on
life from yours. I don’t wish to marry,” she answered positively,
lift his stick again but hurried into the house.
lights and shouts in the enemy’s camp. Rostóv rode up to Bagratión,
like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was
like all those Polish names.”
liked to help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
like his own, at the firing, and went back at a footpace. “Well, some
Like the others, Anna Pávlovna Schérer showed Pierre the change of
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: “They’re coming!
line; and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines,
line of the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person they were
lines of artillery with green caissons.
line (the Guards) was already in action.
line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and
link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and
lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
listening to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood very
little bent, looked with beaming face at the princess without
little companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we’re
little effort.”
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, “Vive l’Empereur!”
living with the Rostóvs.
locality was known and shown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte,
lofty, beautiful feeling, such a...”
lofty sky before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All
loneliness of his daughter amid the general conversation. “Got herself
long.
long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,
longest sentences, he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised
long. Say ‘perhaps.’”
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
looking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.
looking back saw that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne’s
“Look, look!” said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the
look or bad opinion from him,” Rostóv decided; and sorrowfully and
looks and manner gave that impression. The princess felt this, and as if
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
look which was fixed on him, but him she could not see, she only saw
losses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was
lot? And who would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They’ll
love and befriend him.”
loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would consider
lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope that was also new
love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our quarrels
love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the glory of the
lucky man and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris
machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and just as
made a tour of the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of
Mademoiselle Bourienne.
Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole’s
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
Mademoiselle Bourienne, how I shall arrange it,” she added, smiling
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
Mademoiselle Bourienne, “Mary’s is a face which such a coiffure does
Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her
made use of it.... “What have I done?” thought he. And he turned
“Ma foi!” said he, “tomorrow we shall see all that on the
“Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilité,
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
maid’s voice at the door.
“Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,
Majesty.”
make a career and must not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of
make as successful a career of it as possible.”
make him go on.
malevolent and caustic expression softened, as if admitting that what
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
mamma.”
man.” Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of
man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining help
man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings
man is as surly as a dog.”
manner: they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre’s noble
man, our dear Vyazmítinov....”
manure on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded
man with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.
many of them), and at last he saw how a whole detachment of French
marched gaily, as they always do when going into action, especially to
marching along both.
mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and he
“Marie” produced on the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle
market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before the
Markóv immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without
“Marriages are made in heaven,” replied the elderly lady.
married, la petite est gentille.” *
marshal of the court, Count Tolstóy.
Mary.
Mary.
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
Mary, really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little
Mary’s room.
masses.
master’s thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
matters very satisfactorily. Borís, during the campaign, had made the
matters yourself!’ Yes... That was the answer I got!”
“May the devil take them—the traitors!”
me.”
meaning for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just
me,” answered a voice struggling with tears.
meeting arrives. Not daring to look round and without looking round, he
me in war the energy of young men often shows the way better than all
melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at the mention
members of the council of war. They were drinking tea, and only awaited
men disfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one
men, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the
men take their first steps on life’s road, each saw immense changes in
men—the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartorýski.... It
mentioned during the journey.
mentioned their age. “If you marry it will be a different thing,”
merry reminiscences.
message to Kutúzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning
me! That’s the sort of man he is, and nothing more,” replied
me—yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give them all at
middle of the muddy road.
midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
might, feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout, if
might retreat and leave the pickets.”
Mikháylovna’s voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
mile and a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in
miles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round
military code, which he and the others knew in the regiment, there was
milk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty
Milorádovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
minister’s son was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with
minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would it
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
mist!”
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
mist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he has
misunderstandings and did not now feel she had a right to ask him for
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.
more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of
more cunning or subtle diplomatist—you know, a combination of French
more, for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and
more important guests—an old general and his wife, and Anna Pávlovna
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
more! Some more!” a merry voice was saying in his soul. But no more
More than anyone else, Prince Vasíli took possession of Pierre’s
Moscow!”
Moscow after the death of Count Bezúkhov, he would call Pierre, or
most part to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph, generally
moved and halted at the officers’ command, turned with banners flying,
moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp.
movement of the Tsar’s seemed to him enchanting.
movements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny,
move on a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.
“Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here
moving toward our left flank, the higher command found that our center
much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever
much at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkóv
much because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on
much of it left.”
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
mud-bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostóv’s loud
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing without
must gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a special
“Must one die like a dog?” said he.
must remain hidden from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for
muttered something and colored.
my dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?” asked the old man,
“My dear fellow,” Nesvítski whispered to Prince Andrew, “the old
“My dear friend?” said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared
“My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
“My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my
“My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire
“My God! What does it all mean?” thought he. “And here, where at
mysteriously. “Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!” he thought. “Tomorrow
my stupidity.”
“My vocation is a different one,” thought Princess Mary. “My
namesake, the new Count Bezúkhov) “and now she’s in love with that
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutúzov
NAPOLEON
Napoleon. “If he weren’t afraid of a battle why did he ask for that
Napoleon’s proclamation was as follows:
Natásha looked at Sónya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
Natásha, seeing the impression the news of her brother’s wound
Natásha smiled through her tears.
Natásha’s previous remark. “It’s because she was in love with
near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and
near everything grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, and more
near him pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the
needed.
neighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as though it were prepared
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
neither of her gown and coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what
neither of them could think of her as a rival, so they began dressing
never says anything stupid. She says little, but what she does say is
never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent.”
news.
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of
Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of
Nicholas’ letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
“Nicholas!” was all Sónya said, instantly turning white.
night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular
night when he had decided that to marry Hélène would be a calamity and
“Nikólenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling
“Nikólenka... wounded... a letter,” she announced in gleeful
nineteenth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till
no?”
“No.”
no account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to
“Nobody wants me!” thought Rostóv. “There is no one to help me or
“No, but she said that it was all over and that he’s now an
No, certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on his
“No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won’t give up—I know you know
“No good... no good...” said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his
“No, I have been transferred to the line,” said Anatole, hardly able
“No, it will not do,” she said decidedly, clasping her hands. “No,
“No, leave me alone,” said Princess Mary.
“No, merci, mon père.”
“No, mon père.”
“No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving
nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I
“No, one can’t hear them. They’d be firing if we had.”
“No, on my true word of honor,” said Natásha, crossing herself,
“No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...
“No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!” said
“No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty,” said Lise, looking
“No, Sónya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
no such reminiscences really exist—just as none existed in this case.
“Not at all bad!” he thought, examining her, “not at all bad, that
not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.
not come and brought his pupil with him” (for some reason Prince
noted them down.
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
not expect you today,” he added. “I only sent you the note yesterday
Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared
nothing, but that. But even it does not exist, there is nothing but
nothing more important...” he paused, “than to have a good sleep.”
“Nothing, my dear.”
nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
nothing. She felt that Sónya was speaking the truth, that there was
noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.
no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkónski, to reading
“Not killed—wounded!” another officer corrected him.
not know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorúkov.
“Not Kutúzov, but what’s his name—well, never mind... there are
not like us sinners of the line,” cried Rostóv, with martial swagger
not many left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders
“Not more stupid than you, madam,” said the nine-year-old Pétya,
not replying to the Austrian.
not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level
not suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change it.”
not ten times wounded, killed, or betrayed, well... what then?...”
not to challenge Bolkónski. “Of course not!” he now thought. “Is
not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair—yes, my
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words
notwithstanding this, Borís embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
novelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but a
Novosíltsev, Prince Volkónsky, Strógonov, and the others, all richly
now before I am off duty. I’ll take another turn and when I get back
now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgorúkov; I have to
nowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers became
“Now the fun begins,” thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile
“Now then, now then, I’m only joking!” he said. “Remember this,
now told about that affair!”
now was evidently ready with a joke. “Whether tomorrow brings
now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight
“Now you, young prince, what’s your name?” said Prince Bolkónski,
“No, you don’t understand!”
number of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen. The French had not
nurse’s French, at which he and Borís used to laugh long ago.
obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Prince Dolgorúkov out
object it is necessary that... The first column marches... The second
obtain a post on the commander in chief’s staff. Berg and Borís,
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
occasioned by the sausage eaters.
occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away,
occupation of the town of Wischau and the capture of a whole French
occupied by the Emperors and their retinues.
occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me on
o’clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn
o’clock left the third column with which he had been and galloped
of all that mass of huge and handsome men, of all those brilliant,
of all these brilliant young men.
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him.
of a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
of a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian army were then in
of Bagratión’s detachment. His hussars were placed along the line
of birds.
of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front and
“Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear...”
“Of course, we only just missed one another,” said the staff
of England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory will
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
of fate and the designs of rogues. During the few days he spent in
officer.”
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
officer passing by addressed him:
officers.
Officer!” said Bagratión to Rostóv, “are the enemy’s skirmishers
officers became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostóv of their march and
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
officers buttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches,
officers, generals, and adjutants, as they passed Rostóv going or
officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with
officer, with a smile to Bolkónski.
of fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutúzov, saw on the
of Hélène. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an important
of her most august Majesty the Empress Márya Fëdorovna. Pierre felt
of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his
of him—at the battery. He now saw clearly the figure of a red-haired
of him?” Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg.
of horse’s hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
of love and self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange
of officers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, a
of Olmütz where Bolkónski had seen him for the first time abroad, but
of permission previously given him by Kutúzov to be present at the
of Sergéy Kuzmích and at the same time his eyes glanced toward his
of several thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther and
of shots retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the
of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks. How such
of the advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near
of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
of the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.
of the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and
of the dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the
of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished.
of the enemy’s lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us
of the feebleness of age, “Bolkónski!” he whispered, pointing to
of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner
of the hand on the dial of human history.
of the lovers. “That’s happiness!”
of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the squadron, the
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
of them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even certainly,
of the nearness of the Emperor Francis’ black cob, nor of all that was
of the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikháylovna,
of the orderlies and servants.
of the sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told
of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we
of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
of the unwritten code of subordination—looked so fixedly at the
of the victory that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his
of this kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for
of those Frenchmen,” he said. “What nasty brutes they are! I’d
of voices, the tramping feet, the horses’ hoofs moving in mud, the
of Weyrother’s voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.
of which Kutúzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one
“Of whom you imagine me to be one?” said Prince Andrew, with a quiet
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
of yours, is not at all to blame that my face has the misfortune to
“Oh, but you were there?” said Prince Bagratión, addressing Prince
“Oh dear, what a beast I am!” muttered Rostóv, as he read the
“Oh, don’t mention it, Count! I quite understand,” said Berg,
“Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?”
“Oh, go to the devil!” called out a voice, drowned by the laughter
Oh, how I would guard him, how I would tell him the truth, how I would
“Oh, Natásha!” said Sónya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at
“Oh! Oh! Oh!” groaned Kutúzov despairingly and looked around....
“Oh, take those off... those...” she said, pointing to his
“Oh, that is all the same,” Dolgorúkov said quickly, and getting up
“Oh, that’s it!” said Rostóv, evidently thinking of something
“Oh, to die, to die for him,” thought Rostóv.
“Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me.”
“Oh, what a nuisance,” said Dolgorúkov, getting up hurriedly and
“Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them
“Oh, what are you talking about?” said another. “Where is he to
“Oh, yes!”
“Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he’s dined with him—the
“Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you’d been to a fete,
“Oh, you fool!” said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed
“Oh, you Guards!” said Rostóv. “I say, send for some wine.”
Old Bolkónski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasíli’s
old chamberlain was heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her
old fellow? Out of sorts?”
old fool,” he thought. “That Princess Hélène will be beautiful
Old Gabriel brought in the wine.
old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh
old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkónski received a letter from Prince Vasíli
old princess, kissing her soundly. “If I hadn’t this headache I’d
Olmütz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for
Olmütz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors—the
on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a
on a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to
On being relieved from picket duty Rostóv had managed to get a few
once.”
once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men I
once he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left
once recognized it to be a tuft of grass. She was terribly close to him.
on condition that she should tell no one.
one is to interfere with his arrangements—leads his division to
one of the Ápsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
one of the lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had
one spot. His predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian
“One was damaged,” answered the staff officer, “and the other I
One was on a white horse. Prince Bagratión and Prince Dolgorúkov with
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
On Hélène’s name day, a small party of just their own people—as
on his pupil’s behalf. That’s how it’s to be understood! ‘How
on horseback facing the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed
only covered by her garments. And having once seen this he could not
“Only let me report this gentleman’s business, and I shall be at
only lit fires to deceive us.
Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt
“Only that?” said Bolkónski.
only to express his rapture fully.
Only when approaching Bagratión did Rostóv let his horse gallop again,
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostóv think of what he ought to
On our right flank commanded by Bagratión, at nine o’clock the battle
On retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
on seeing Rostóv before him, with whom he would inevitably collide.
“On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well,” said
on the contrary, they stimulated his energy and determination.
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
on the ground.
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
On the twelfth of November, Kutúzov’s active army, in camp before
on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she
On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutúzov,
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
or anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it
ordained that the Austrian army should maneuver the previous year on the
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Borís, rode
ordered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in
orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going with a
orders.
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord’s
or even to wish to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother,
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it
or Kutúzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was
or make out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of
or two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,
or you as having been at all insulted, and as a man older than you, my
Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander
other officer; he’ll say: ‘Go and find out what’s there.’ There
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew. “O God,” she
others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the
otherwise. To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them
ought to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes. His
ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgorúkov had ordered
our enemies! Hurrah!” he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar’s
our hands! No, we mustn’t forget Suvórov and his rule—not to put
our officers.”
ourselves, dear prince,” said the little princess (of course, in
‘our Sovereign, the Emperor,’ as they say at official dinners,”
our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing.
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone
out.
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan.
out over the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and
outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are
out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops
over, and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no.
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped
own breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
own eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
pace.
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him
pale and then blushing.
pale on seeing her father-in-law.
pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.
paralyzed his will.
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a bad
parties, wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at
part in it, but also by the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers,
part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly beauty.
party at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
passed, the Pávlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischau
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a
passing it across Hélène’s back. Hélène stooped forward to make
passionately, at which she laughed; at the other could be heard the
passionately repents. I will do all I can to arrange the match between
past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he went
patted his favorite, Rostóv, on the shoulder.
Pávlovna again touched Pierre’s sleeve, saying: “I hope you won’t
Pávlovna’s, an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire
Pávlovna’s usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added:
Pávlovna’s voice, “I see you are all right there.”
Pávlovna’s words and looks when she spoke to him about his house,
Pávlovna threatened him on behalf of “our dear Vyazmítinov,” and
pay. I can tell you for myself...”
people—businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike—were all
perfection of manner. If he ever thought of Hélène, it was just of
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at
personage, a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive.
personal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince
Petersburg and staying at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness,
Petersburg. It is high time for you to get away from these terrible
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!” he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
Pétya.
Pétya. Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame
Pétya paced the room in silence for a time.
Pétya, pacing the room with large, resolute strides. “Now I’m very
“Pétya, you’re a stupid!” said Natásha.
Pierre.
Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Hélène’s
Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezúkhov and a rich man, felt
Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story
Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have
Pierre. “What of it? It’s the truth!” and he himself smiled his
Pierre who was under such obligations to him (“But never mind that”)
Pierre, without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburg house
pinch of snuff.
pity me. Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved.” He sighed
pity’s sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son of
place and without answering drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing
place him on a stretcher that had been brought. The soldier groaned.
plain enough as it is.”
plan of a flanking movement.
plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a firm and
plans to Kutúzov’s quarters where the council of war was to be
playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on
playing chess. Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees. Borís, in
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone’s
“Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment,” came the
“Plenty of time, your excellency,” muttered Kutúzov in the midst of
point... Come, how are you?” asked Rostóv.
pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
point where the French pickets had been standing that evening.
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with
pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
poor Amélie’s happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so
position. He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire,
possessed of a Helen. “But no doubt it always is and must be so!”
possessed. Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel
possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The aunt
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
Pratzen Heights.
Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes
Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and
precedes a battle and had spent that happy day in inactivity, was all
premeditation Prince Vasíli took the first opportunity to gain his
preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to
preparation swept over all the troops.
presence and particularly distinguished himself.”
present Emperor—more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met a
president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to be
pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Borís. “You know I should
presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had to
pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that
pretty face.
pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting
pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
prince.
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might
Prince Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt
Prince Andrew shouted, “Brothers! All’s lost!” And at this as if
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
Prince Bagratión and Túshin looked with equal intentness at
Prince Bagratión looked at Túshin, evidently reluctant to show
Prince Bagratión proposed to Dolgorúkov to send to inquire of the
Prince Bagratión to begin the council. At last Bagratión’s orderly
Prince Bolkónski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
Prince Bolkónski’s household felt that their life had not been real
Prince Bolkónski surveyed Anatole.
Prince Dolgorúkov ceased to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not
Prince Dolgorúkov to the advanced post of the French army.
prince interrupted her.
Prince Kurágin about me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand
Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
prince’s question as to how she felt.
princess’ beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
“Princess, come here!” he shouted.
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
princess’ hair. It was evident that he could be silent in this way for
princess’ hand.
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
Princess Kurágina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,
Princess Mary.
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to
Princess Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At
Princess Mary sighed, and having crossed herself went down, thinking
Princess Mary’s self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to
Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise’s request,
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation.
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
princess on hearing the news.
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll’s,
Prince Vasíli.
Prince Vasíli and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
Prince Vasíli and that son of his to me? Prince Vasíli is a shallow
Prince Vasíli and the generals, had the benefit of the diplomat.
Prince Vasíli arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by
Prince Vasíli a third time. “How absent-minded you are, my dear
Prince Vasíli did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had
Prince Vasíli frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his
Prince Vasíli had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw
Prince Vasíli had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had
Prince Vasíli passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down
Prince Vasíli readily adopted her tone and the little princess also
Prince Vasíli rose.
Prince Vasíli’s arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were
Prince Vasíli saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered
Prince Vasíli’s last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
Prince Vasíli smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at
Prince Vasíli was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans.
Prince Vasíli, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a
Prince Vasíli, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox
“Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for
probably he did not, for in general he thought very little—but his
proceeded to his study.
produced on Sónya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father’s and mother’s
promotion to the rank of major, and Rostóv, who had already drunk
proofs of Nikólenka’s virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
properly. Hélène answered with a smile that she too had missed it.
proper posts. Borís had been quartered, and had marched all the
propose is the only thing possible.”
proposition to you in his pupil’s—I mean, his son’s—name. Do you
protégé, but Prince Dolgorúkov politely and firmly pressing his hand
Przebyszéwski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columns
Przebyszéwski’s and Langeron’s columns which had already gone down
Przebyszéwski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held his
public to appreciate his skill.
pulling it or being pushed by it he did not know, but rushed along at
purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
purple face, reporting something.
purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking
purse that sank into the sofa. “As for us, Count, we get along on our
putting the nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest.
qualities. He was always hearing such words as: “With your remarkable
question him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,
quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but he had the
quiet and peace. Thank God!...”
quiet authority, “you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with
quite close at hand, and a voice of naïve terror barely two steps from
quite heard.
quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty. She was so plain that
raised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Weyrother’s face,
rank (for he did nothing), that Prince Vasíli had procured for him,
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
ranks were returning from the attack. Rostóv got out of their way,
ran up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
rapidly.
rapidly and indistinctly. “You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!...
rapid, self-confident, familiar tone. “Here is my second son; please
rather of death, as the saying is. ‘Albanians!’ and ‘devils!’
rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosíltsev who was near him, as
rather than of what the generals were disputing about.
reached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and
read a congratulation on his future son-in-law and on his daughter’s
reading confirmation in Anna Mikháylovna’s face.
reading. Then Milorádovich looked round significantly at the other
read this in Tíkhon’s face and in that of Prince Vasíli’s valet,
realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince
rearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was
rebuking her for her fall.
recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasíli and others, and was
received and read the then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexander
received Pierre with a shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the
receiving from all sides declarations of the people’s loyalty, that
reception room if he wished to see him. Borís thanked him and went to
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt
recognized his lamented and adored monarch.
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
recollections.” Prince Vasíli sighed. “Yes, yes, my boy. And my
recounting his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure
reduced to tears.
reflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind
refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rostóv instantly
refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile.
regiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerning
regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief’s order to throw
regular motion as a result of all that activity.
relating to Nikólenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
remained alone with him for a long time.
remained in reserve and Nicholas Rostóv spent that day in a dull and
remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they
remarks which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became
remark to him, pointing to the gallant Ápsherons.
remember everything?” said Natásha, with an expressive gesture,
“Remember, for you everything depends on this.”
remember Nikólenka too, I remember him well,” she said. “But I
remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear, and
repeated by others from various sides and all became silent.
repeated. “I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it’s not my
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
reply.
reported to him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone
represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled by the
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
request.
resembling his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him
reserve tomorrow,” he thought. “I’ll ask leave to go to the front,
resolution. Can it be that I have none?”
resounded. The column moved forward without knowing where and unable,
resounding voice, apparently to preclude the possibility of not being
respectfully.
respectfully bowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence lasted
restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter
result from it—no longer seemed to be in the future but in the past.
retreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had
retreating forces.
returned, and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three
returned from the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud
richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it.
rich old man. But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs,
rich youths, officers and cadets, who had galloped past him on their
ride and especially by the sound of the bullets.
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty
riding, and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the
riding away, say to Czartorýski: “What a terrible thing war is: what
riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots. The
right.
right!” And his head once more sank to his horse’s neck. All at once
right flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan,
right—he did not know. “But was it really not possible for Kutúzov
right, it is advantageous to attack the enemy’s latter wing especially
ring, and Zherkóv, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
road which gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it
rode, not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When
rode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a black uniform with
rode with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and
room.
room, and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evening
room and we shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself
room by which Dolgorúkov had entered—a short man in civilian clothes
rose in alarm on seeing it.
“Rostóv!”
Rostóv.
Rostóv.
Rostóv and most of the officers after the review.
Rostóv considered, and then went in the direction where they said he
Rostóv could already see their faces and heard the command:
Rostóv did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.
Rostóv did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes
Rostóv fancied he had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his
(Rostóv felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men
Rostóv followed them. In front of him walked Kutúzov’s groom leading
Rostóv from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke
Rostóv had been ordered to look for Kutúzov and the Emperor near the
Rostóv himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling
Rostóv learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing
Rostóv let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded
Rostóv looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
Rostóv rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now
Rostóv saw tears filling the Emperor’s eyes and heard him, as he was
Rostóv’s face. A gentle, mild light poured from them. Then all at
Rostóv’s feeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard
Rostóv’s horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,
Rostóv smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.
Rostóv spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fédchenko and two other
Rostóv’s soul (it seemed to Rostóv that he understood everything),
Rostóv, standing in the front lines of Kutúzov’s army which the Tsar
Rostóv, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rode with
Rostóv stopped.
Rostóv stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was
Rostóv too, bending over his saddle, shouted “Hurrah!” with all his
Rostóv took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
Rostóv turned his horse and galloped back. Four more reports followed
Rostóv was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
Rostóv, who had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought
round and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but
round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces
round shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess’
round the table, the clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with
round with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
Russian arms.
Russian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be
Russian troops moving down the valley to their left.
Russian valor—what more could be wished for?”
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
saber them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, the hussars with mustaches. Along
sabretache...”—“Keep to the right, your honor, there are bushes
sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It
said.
said a gunner, coming up to Túshin.
said another.
said he, “but the health of our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and
said he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
said, “how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil?
said inquiringly.
said nothing to Borís and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts
said, of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.
said Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the
saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended
same as usual,” and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast
same commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
same sergeant major Iván Mítrich, the same company dog Jack, and the
same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of the
same time at the Emperor Francis.
same to me!” he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting
sat down languidly on the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
saved. But he saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but the
save myself?” he thought. He rode on to the region where the greatest
saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory. The
saw them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasíli’s face,
say (as he has done before) that I’m in the dumps.”
saying it right, I have drunk a good deal—but that is how I feel, and
saying that, on the contrary, she remembered him quite well. Then
say that it is dull in my house again,” and she glanced at Hélène.
say to the adjutant that Borís felt uncomfortable. He turned away and
Schérer. At the other end sat the younger and less important guests,
Schlappanitz and Bellowitz which cover the enemy’s front. For this
Schlappanitz and the Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of
Schön Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle
Schoss, and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him “dear
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
second time. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mère) appeared, and
Seeing that smile, Rostóv involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
Seeing them he kept thinking, “That may be the very standard with
seek nothing, be not anxious or envious. Man’s future and thy own fate
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
seemed to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the
seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head
seemed to him that it was getting lighter. To the left he saw a sloping
seemed to say: “Yes, there’s nothing left for you and me but to sip
seemed to say. “You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a
seen him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse’s daughter—at her
seen through.
seen you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!” said
see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find a place for you
seized by terror lest he had already, in some way, bound himself to do
seized him at the thought of that dreadful step. A thousand times during
seize some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were there.
seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people.
self-complacency than his did.) “Well, he stormed at me, as the saying
self-complacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy happily
self-confident.
self-possession. If a man lacking in self-confidence remains dumb on
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostóv’s soul.
self-respect, but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen.
“Sell us that horse!” Denísov called out to the Cossacks.
semi-private, long-established jokes and amusing reminiscences, though
sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around
‘Sergéy’ he sobbed, ‘Kuz-mí-ch,’ tears, and ‘From all
“Sergéy Kuzmích—From all sides—” he said, unbuttoning the top
Sergéy Kuzmích...’ Poor Vyazmítinov could not get any farther!
serious duel, and besides, Drubetskóy, who says he is an old friend
serious for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling
service,” said the prince disdainfully. “Why his son is coming I
several of them were not separated from one another but merged into a
Several of those present smiled at Zherkóv’s words, expecting one of
Several soldiers fell.
several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the
several thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre’s peasants,
Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse, screams,
severity changed, and he drew Pierre’s hand downwards, made him sit
shall think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at
“Shall you write to him?” she asked.
shame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and run to
shameless, and he ignores her!”
sharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of the
She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer any
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him
she continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look at
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
She drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.
(She glanced at Hélène and smiled at her.) “My dear Hélène, be
she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrain from weeping at these
she had seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it
“She is not very well,” answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with
she must love him if she could so far forget herself! Perhaps I might
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
she ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not.
She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they have
She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.
She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and
She rushed to Sónya, hugged her, and began to cry.
She thought: “If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole
she turned to his father. The conversation was general and animated,
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who
She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks
she was, Natásha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty.
she would say. What could all that matter in comparison with the will of
shone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suggested
Shortly after nine o’clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his
shots came.
should be a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him
should be glad and not cry.”
shoulders close to his eyes.
should much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front.”
should now be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly
“Shouldn’t we now send for Berg?” asked Borís. “He would drink
shouted hoarsely.
shouting came from, a fire flared up and went out again, then another,
shouting grew louder and louder. Rostóv could hear the sound of French
shouts of hurrah, and saw wounded being brought back (there were not
shouts of thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar
showed how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really
showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the light
“Shut up!”
side and looked round with a frown. Along the road from Pratzen galloped
side as her betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her
side by side. Prince Vasíli was not having any supper: he went round
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
sides’ was smothered in sobs and he could get no farther. And again
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. “You have a maroon
sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and
sign papers, to present himself at government offices, the purpose of
silence.
silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity of his
silver and crystal gleamed, so did the ladies’ toilets and the gold
“Since Prince Bagratión is not coming, we may begin,” said
singer” (he meant Natásha’s Italian singing master), “that’s
sire,” * he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among
sister, black eyes... Na... tasha... (Won’t she be surprised when
sitting at tea with Bilíbin. “The fete is for tomorrow. How is your
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
situated,” said Prince Andrew.
six miles away, or whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one
Six weeks after Anna Pávlovna’s “At Home” and after the sleepless
Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezúkhov’s
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
sky—the lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray
sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with our
sleeve with her finger, saying:
slippery ice that covered the millpool.
slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing
smile.
smile of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of
smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.
smoke enveloped everything.
smooth—felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
so alien to us.
so-called battle of the three Emperors—that is to say, a slow movement
society.
society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy
so completely silenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive
so contrary to his method of conducting war? Believe me, he is afraid,
so do you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!”
soft hand taking hers firmly, and she touched with her lips a white
soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
“So it is all finished!” he thought. “And how has it all happened?
“our men have been wasting time.”
our people...”
    * Ours.
“ours,” kissing his finger tips.
out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards.
out a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot
out his notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of the
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
out like cords. “You are mad, I tell you. I won’t allow it.
out. Mack loses a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke
out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him from
out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. “This
over a fire brigade of Bonaparte’s, that will be another story and
over beamed with irrepressible delight.) “It’s in the Emperor’s
over his shoulder.
overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as
over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on
over the squadron. Rostóv raised his saber, ready to strike, but at
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and
pale, and added, “Look at it, young man.”
pale and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on
pale face and glittering eyes.
paper. He looked gloomily in Rostóv’s face and said: “I am witing
papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
parade. However, I will let you know.”
parade... I am the first to apologize, you know me!... He was very
pardon. As soon as Rostóv heard them, an enormous load of doubt
part from his horse, and at last sprang down and called to his orderly.
     particularly victorious.”
passing Bagratión and racing one another they rushed in an irregular
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking
Passing by Kutúzov’s carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of
pass the three officers quite easily, but Zherkóv, pushing Nesvítski
past the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the
pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation. “The
pausing. “The only question is what will come of the meeting between
Pávlograd commander. The commanders met with polite bows but with
peculiarly deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened
people show to everyone when they are happy.
perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
personage he was referring to.
personally it would be a pleasure to hand over the supreme command
philosophizing voice with pleasure.
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
pillows one at a time and shaking them.
pitied. She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don’t need her,
place! We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a
player, in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front
play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the
pleasant smile—his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,
“Please, Andrew, for my sake!...”
“Please be quick,” he said.
pleased!” And he held out his hand to the captain.
“Please, Denísov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know,”
“Please have a look at it”—and Kutúzov with an ironical smile
please make way!”
“Please, your excellency, for God’s sake!” he kept saying,
pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing
pocket and that’s quite simple and is no one else’s business.”
pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth
point.”
point. Ask Denísov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to
politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
political events.
poor resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in
portmanteau into the vehicle, “we are to move on still farther. The
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
position. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
position, it was now necessary to attack in order to cut a way through
position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
position of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance of
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Túshin, stepping
possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original,
possible. Kutúzov himself with all his transport took the road to
posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position.
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp
Potëmkins or Suvórovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced
pouch was slung. He had an officer’s sword in his hand. The soldier
pour vous. *(2) Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this
powder,” said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
powder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at that
prancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
Prater... True, we have no Prater here...”
prearranged sentence.
preening its plumage and became motionless.
prepare a circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and
presence, I will teach you to behave yourself.”
presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
preserve his gravity.
pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this
pressure lay his only hope of salvation.
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
Prince.”
Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is,” said the other
Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the
Prince Andrew could not understand.
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. “I know that out of a million
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutúzov’s army
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer’s small figure.
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutúzov’s face only a foot distant from him
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front
Prince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:
Prince Andrew riding up to the officer.
Prince Andrew said nothing to Túshin. They were both so busy as to seem
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless,
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
Prince Andrew’s joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
Prince Andrew stayed at Brünn with Bilíbin, a Russian acquaintance of
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutúzov but the expression of
Prince Andrew stopped short.
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the
“Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is
Prince Bagratión, having reached the highest point of our right flank,
Prince Bagratión rode an officer of the suite, the prince’s personal
Prince Bagratión screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the
prince, but could not get it quite right.)
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its
princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother’s
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.
prince’s things in my bedroom,” said he to the servant who was
private and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutúzov had
“Probably,” said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
probably think it easy to gain victories!” he thought. His eyes
probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot had
proceeding as usual. Denísov, who had been losing at cards all night,
projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately.”
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,
promise of rising in his diplomatic career. He was still a young man but
promotion.
Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong
purse.
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up
purse undah the pillow,” he said, and went out to the quartermaster.
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
putting them down. When they’ve been put down, the war with Buonaparte
puzzled the devil himself! When you get there you’ll find out what
quartermaster for the money.”
quartermaster’s presence.
quarter of an hour between two fires.”
quarters and riding up to Captain Timókhin who was walking in front.
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
“Qu’ est-ce qu’il chante?” * asked a Frenchman.
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give. He
quickly as possible.
quickly. Prince Bagratión, uttering his words with an Oriental accent,
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that
quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his
quick or the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot.”
“Quite avare, your excellency,” suddenly shouted the colonel,
quite opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be
quoting one of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and
rage, “who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here,
railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few
raising his eyebrows.
ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of the
ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.
range and wipe them out?” These were the questions each man of the
ranks.
ranks in this regiment.”
ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
rapidity. He again vividly recalled the details of the battle, no longer
rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had
rascality....”
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest
Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit
reached Bagratión, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in
reached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.
realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the
“Really I don’t care about that, I don’t care at all,” said
reappeared.
reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above
recalling Bilíbin’s words.
received.
received as a savior.”
received. A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutúzov was awarded
received him with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to
reception hall: Michael Ivánovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dólokhov
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary’s face and she was silent as if
red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite
“refill my pipe for that one!” and then, scattering sparks from it,
reflected on theirs.
regimental commander and Major Ekonómov had stopped beside a bridge,
regimental commander cooling down a little. “Leave indeed.... One says
regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders, and
regimental commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its
regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
regiment, and Bogdánich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And
regiment but was not liked; Rostóv especially detested him and was
regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the commencement
regiment had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for
regiment—instead of the straggling, disorderly crowd it had been on
regiment next to no time, my lad, you’re here today and tomorrow
regiment, saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he
regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
regular order.
reinforce the right flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark
reins and started of his own accord.
relating to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who could
remain stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.
repeating to himself at each alternate step, “Left... left...
repented and added: “I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad.”
replied.
report, and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended
reports from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and
reports one after another, and a third.
reports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?” he said.
report was heard, Bagratión looked round and shouted, “Hurrah!”
reprimanding and reproaching him. Túshin gave no orders, and,
reproached him for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him
repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack
required papers. Kutúzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath
reserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, and the four guns
reserve units were able to join up, and the fight was at an end. The
resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers in
respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the
responsibility. But circumstances are sometimes too strong for us,
resting, and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he
“Retire! All to retire!” he shouted from a distance.
retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the
retreat to the dip by echelons.” So he reasoned.... All the time
     return.”
returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At
returning to the town. The commander in chief made a sign that the
reverence and was beyond question.
rider’s leg. Blood was flowing from his head; he struggled but could
riding a fine bobtailed horse, and a civilian—an accountant who had
right—serve him. Nicholas Bolkónski’s son need not serve under
right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed in
right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Túshin with his guns,
ringing, deliberate voice. “I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault
risen and was going toward his room.
river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away.
rivulet flowed, the soul-stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was
road. Bagratión’s exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone
rode past the limbers to the farthest cannon.
roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You fear
Rook—a handsome horse despite its game leg—had the happy air of a
room. Denísov silently watched Lavrúshka’s movements, and when the
room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his
Rostóv, absorbed by his relations with Bogdánich, had paused on the
Rostóv, and sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting
Rostóv anticipated his horse’s movements and became more and more
Rostóv did not speak.
Rostóv did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,
Rostóv felt Denísov’s gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and
Rostóv, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one officer
Rostóv heard.
Rostóv, his eyes avoiding Denísov, began buttoning his coat, buckled
Rostóv’s and back, and back again and again in an instant.
Rostóv saw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs
Rostóv shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: “Nor do I, but
Rostóv thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand
Rostóv took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins
Rostóv took the money, avoiding Telyánin’s eyes, and went out of the
Rostóv took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and
Rostóv waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing,
Rostóv went to Telyánin’s quarters.
Rostóv wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and
Rostóv, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There was
rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talking
round and clapping Rostóv on the shoulder with his big hand.
round once more. The French had fallen behind, and just as he looked
round-shouldered Captain Túshin, stumbling over the tail of the gun
round the first man changed his run to a walk and, turning, shouted
rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath while the
running beside Timókhin, killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was
running? Can they be coming at me? And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone
rushing at the cadet to restrain him.
Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkóv’s untimely jest.
     Russian army, I must say that your victory was not
Russian army loots terribly—her army is destroyed, her capital
Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and
Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.
Russians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
Russians from Krems to Znaim.
Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they have been
Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russian
Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the
saber which had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber of
saddle, he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in
said.
said a tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and
said Bilíbin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. “Franz, put the
said Dólokhov.
said he. “Now for trouble!” Rostóv looked out of the window and
said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
said Rostóv, blushing.
said Rostóv in an imploring voice, “but I can’t apologize, by God I
said: “That’s bad! Go on, go on.”
said the general, turning to an artillery officer. “Have a little fun
said the old soldier dismally to a comrade, “you’ll forget to
said yesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please.”
said Zherkóv.
same!”
same expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose
satisfaction.
satisfied with him?” he asked the regimental commander.
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
sausages and a bottle of wine.
saw Denísov coming home. Denísov was a small man with a red face,
saw friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday’s adjutant
say.
saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying
saying as he moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called
say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the little
scabbard and flourishing it.
sca’cwow? Call the quahtehmasteh,” he shouted to Lavrúshka.
scarred and puffy face.
Schönbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,
“Schon fleissig?” * said Rostóv with the same gay brotherly smile
schoolboy called up before a large audience for an examination in which
scoundrel is again at our heels!”
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don’t see it like that. And
scratch yourself.”
screams, continued.
screams kept repeating:
“Second line... have you written it?” he continued dictating to the
seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation.
secretary of the Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my
secret malevolence in their hearts.
“See how smart she’s made herself! Oh, the devils!”
seeing some men running toward him. “They will help me!” In front
seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say.
seemed impossible. “But perhaps they may do it!” For more than ten
seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with
seemed to be Poles—all under the Russian crown—but here they’re
seemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,
seemed to groan at the terrible impact.
seemed to hear left... left... left.
seemed to him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One
seemed to him that Bogdánich rode so near in order to show him his
seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a day, since he
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
see the soldiers’ shaggy caps, distinguish the officers from the men,
see you,” he added, bowing his head.
“Sell me the missis,” said another soldier, addressing the German,
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
senseless cry, “Cut off!” that is so terrible in battle, and that
separating the living from the dead—lay between them. All were
sergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire
sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log
seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment’s
serious tone, “but the prince told me to ‘go and tell the colonel
Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. The immense
serve him. Rostóv patted the horse’s neck and then his flank, and
service... it can’t be helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on
serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been
serving our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and
set fire to the Schön Grabern village, delayed the French advance. The
set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and
setting fire to Schön Grabern.
setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no
setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
settled down comfortably beside the fire.
seven in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon.”
“Seven new and three old imperials.”
seventeen of the forty men of the guns’ crews had been disabled, but
several dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approached
severely. “You don’t wish to apologize, but, man, it’s not only to
shading his eyes with his small hand.
shako on the back of his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging
shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself
“Shall we have time to change clothes?”
share defeat and disgrace with Kutúzov’s whole army.”
sharply, with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, “I can’t prevent
sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was Timókhin’s
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.
shed, and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen.
she felt guilty.
“She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve,” went the
She looked timidly at her brother.
shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,
She smiled as she uttered his pet name, “Andrúsha.” It was
“She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room.
shirt, and in every knapsack the appointed number of articles, “awl,
shooting at you like a target.”
short sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in
shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense
shouted.
shouted Denísov in a bloodthirsty tone.
shouted Denísov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with
shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointing
shouted to him:
showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes
showing the spot where it burst.
shudder of disgust.
side of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,
Sídorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless
sight of Murat’s mantle and ostrich plumes, qu’il n’y voit que du
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
sign that this was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning
silence and the regular tramp of feet beating the ground in unison, one
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
silent. At first Kutúzov stood still while the regiment moved; then he
silently—fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to
silently, with the languid interest of sick children, at the envoy
simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under
Since early morning—despite an injunction not to approach the picket
“Singers to the front” came the captain’s order.
sister’s room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurrying
sit down! Sit down, Michael Ivánovich!”
situation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead it
Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by
skittles,” said he in conclusion.
sleep at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown
slightly open, as if to say, “Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in my
slight smile he began to examine his nails.
“Smack at ‘em, lads!” he kept saying, seizing the guns by the
small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,
small cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by
“Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!” said one.
smeared with chalk—as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile, and pronouncing the phrase “knocked out” with ringing
smiled and interrupted him.
smile of satisfaction and presented a strange appearance among the
smile on his lips change.
smoke, and an officer catching sight of Bagratión rushed shouting after
smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Some
smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
snacks.”
so. And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack’s army
soap, and all,” as the soldiers say. There was only one circumstance
society, and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
society woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her
soldier.
soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file
soldier. “I’ll teach you to push on!... Back!”
soldier of forty—looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his
soldiers, after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all
soldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left some
soldiers’ boots. More than half the men’s boots were in holes. But
soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
soldiers passed in a semicircle round something where the ball had
soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers’ voices could be
soldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off
soldiers. “Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can’t you wait?
soldier three gold pieces.
soldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were
soldier, with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyánin’s eyes to
“Some herb vodka? Certainly!” said Túshin. “But still, to
someone to fire at.
something.”
something big, that splashed into the water.
something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostóv paused. “No,
something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear
sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot,
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked well
some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves
somewhere below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not
somewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
song.
song, arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness.
son made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were
son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
Soon after Prince Bagratión had left him, Túshin had succeeded in
soothe him.
sort—(le sort de l’armée d’Ulm).” * He remembered these words
so terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
“So that’s what they hit with?” asked the accountant. “How
So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander
“So they will,” said Nesvítski. “No, but what I should like,”
sounded and you’ll be in a pretty position without your boots!” (The
sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight.
sounded much like irony. But Kutúzov went on blandly smiling with the
sounded. Several of our men fell, among them the round-faced officer
sound of footsteps.
sound of officers’ voices in eager conversation.
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlóvski looked at him, the
sounds very fast: “Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaská,” he said,
sount ze retreat!”
so widely from a private.
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the
sparkling black eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an
speaking quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and
spectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but his
spirited impression.
Splendid! And I am sitting here ill, as you see.”
splendid house!”
splendidly.”
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
“Splendid! What a horse he will be!” he thought with a smile, and
spoke as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions—the
spoke in abrupt sentences. “The whole company can bear witness. I beg
spoken to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of
spoke particularly slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no
spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivánovich more often than to anyone else.
spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.
squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron
squadron commander.
squadron in which Nicholas Rostóv served as a cadet was quartered in
squadron may be recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon. Our
squadron’s officers in Denísov’s quarters.
squadron, that in which Rostóv was serving under Denísov, to return to
squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned
staff?”
staff...”
staff captain’s question by a disapproving shake of his head.
staff officer.
staff officer, and at Zherkóv, and he frowned.
staff officer smiled.) “Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of
standing together out of range of the shots, watching, now the small
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was
starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the
stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual
stayed his hand. The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general,
step; a soldier who had fallen behind, his face showing alarm at his
step could be heard. On their left flank, nearest to Bagratión, marched
stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant
stepped softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the creaking of springs,
steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of
steps. “O God,” he said with tears in his eyes, “how could you do
stern eyes on his son.
stern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separates
still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but
still five men between him and Dólokhov with his bluish-gray uniform.
still he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
Still no one moved. The troops of the left flank, infantry and hussars
still why didn’t you capture him? So don’t be surprised if not only
“Stop jesting,” said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news
stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
stopped the company.” Dólokhov breathed heavily from weariness and
“Stop this jesting,” he said.
straight into his son’s face with keen eyes which seemed to see
streamed out of a side street.
streets of Brünn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the
stretchers came into view before Rostóv. And the fear of death and of
“Stretchers!” shouted someone behind him.
strictly to obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it
striking a blow!”
striking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally.
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame
strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
struck the ground in front of them.
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
subordinate by me.
subordinate commanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least
subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, “is that the
subtleties here beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can’t make it
succeeded in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as
successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this
such things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as
suddenly.
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...
suddenly replied the irate colonel. “If you vere in the cavalry...”
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise
suite.
suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see
suite and said in French:
suite who had mimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep!
superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if
superior.
supported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in his throat and he
support of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened
supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was
surprise, the French had thrown down their muskets and run. Dólokhov,
surrendered but had beaten the French.
“Surrounded! Cut off? We’re lost!” shouted the fugitives.
Suvórov giving his saber to Bagratión in Italy, and the recollection
Suvórov’s wars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottings for
sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
sweet, so good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one.”
swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with long
table. Denísov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of
“Take a stick between your legs, that’ll suit you for a horse!”
take it...” He threw it on the table. “I have an old father and
“Take it if you like,” said the officer, giving the girl an apple.
take me too? Who are these men?” thought Rostóv, scarcely believing
taken advice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before the
taken, and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And
taken and I hope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been
takes place at such moments.
take the money,” and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
take these away. Put this on the seat and this to the right.”
“Take this and deliver it,” said he to his adjutant, handing him the
taking advantage of it!”
taking charges from their pouches, while others were firing, though who
taking no notice of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the
taking offense, but you don’t mind disgracing the whole regiment!”
taking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were
Taking the colonel’s outburst as a challenge to his courage, the
talked of peace but did not believe in its possibility; others talked
tangled black hair.
teach you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?”
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
telling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened.”
telling me what forces are being collected against him! While you and I
“Tell me about that!” he said.
“Tell me, when did the battle begin?” he asked hurriedly.
“Tell them to give me a seat, for God’s sake!”
“Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!” shouted Denísov
Telyánin.
Telyánin.
Telyánin, and he went out to give the order.
Telyánin’s orderly. “Has something happened?” he added, surprised
Telyánin, taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. “We
Telyánin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostóv had
Ten minutes later Lavrúshka brought the coffee. “He’s coming!”
terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear—resembling the line
tête-de-pont. * They spin him a thousand gasconades, saying that
“Thank you, my dear.” She kissed him on the forehead and sat down
“Thank you very much, I will go on alone,” said Prince Andrew,
“Thank you very much, Prince,” answered one of the officers, pleased
thank you! You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the
than once. “You know it won’t do to leave your posts like this.
that came upon him at Hollabrünn, which was clearly impossible. But
that could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the
that everything done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of
that had advanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge
that had already once been given in detail: “and tell the hussars
that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without
that he could not believe his eyes. “Who are they? Why are they
that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse into
that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still
that instant the trooper Nikítenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away
“That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why.”
“That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment,” he said.
that makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade of
that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering.
that more irritating news than yours could not have been conceived.
that negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he
That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated,” said Bilíbin,
that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill
     * “That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of
“That’s all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that’s not the
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkónski
“That’s a miwacle.”
“That’s better, Count,” said the staff captain, beginning to
“That’s for them all,” he said to the officer who came up.
“That’s just it,” answered Bilíbin. “Listen! The French entered
“That’s just it, my dear fellow. You see it’s hurrah for the Tsar,
That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart.
“That’s our battery,” said the staff officer indicating the
“That’s twue, devil take it!” shouted Denísov, jumping up. “Now
that sum. “He’s begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg,” he
that the hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.’”
that there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war,
that they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and the
that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.
that village, amid the smoke, was something resembling a battery, but it
“That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp,” came a voice
that were afloat, and so Kutúzov’s suggestion of an Austrian victory
that were arriving from Russia. If Kutúzov decided to remain at Krems,
that will decide the matter, but those who devised it,” said Bilíbin
“That would be fine, gentlemen!”
“That would take too long to tell,” answered the son.
that year to Moreau to enter the Russian service.... “Wonderful!...
thawing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides
the adjutant and the minister. “Away from the smell of powder, they
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
the adjutant on duty,” said the official. “He will conduct you to
the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkónski came into the room with the
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been
the aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to the
the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving from
the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutúzov, not considering this
the architect.
the armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the
the army considerably. Throughout the whole army and at headquarters
the army now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher, it is
the arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna,
the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply
the baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last
the battalion commander. “Oh, my God!” he added, stepping resolutely
The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.
the battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attached
The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
“The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance,” began
the better. But Bogdánich, without looking at or recognizing Rostóv,
The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Váska Denísov, and his whole
the Bohemian mountains with. It’s a bad lookout, old fellow! But
the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood. The French line was
the boots.
the bridge.
the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard
the bridge and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the
the bridge chased each other along. Looking on the bridge he saw equally
the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the
the bridge unobserved, flings the bags of incendiary material into
The cadet was Rostóv. With one hand he supported the other; he was
the care of a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengaged his
the case, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead. The soldiers,
The case is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and
the chair for her.
the changed expression on Prince Bagratión’s face at this moment. It
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as
The cloak they spread under him was wet with blood which stained his
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn
The coin was a new one. Rostóv rose and went up to Telyánin.
the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
the colonel, closely—to find in his face confirmation of his own
The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvítski.
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout
The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to questions put
“The commander in chief is engaged,” repeated Kozlóvski calmly.
“The commander in chief is engaged,” said Kozlóvski, going
The commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I’ll
the commander in chief, Kutúzov.
the commander in chief’s one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied
the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
the commander of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in
The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagratión, entreating
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and
the commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of
the complete darkness Túshin’s guns moved forward, surrounded by the
the convoy officer.
the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
The crowd moved on again. Nesvítski realized that it was a cannon ball.
the crowd of retreating soldiers, ordering them back. Bagratión rode up
the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers
the determination of Denísov who flourished his sword and shouted
“The devil only knows! They say so.”
“The devil only knows what they’re about!” muttered Denísov.
“The devil skin your Emperor.”
the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
the door.
the door himself behind him.
The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation
     the earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same
the ebb and flow of these sounds.
the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia
The Emperor interrupted him.
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and
the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of the
the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it they came upon some
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent,
the face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got
the fall of Austria’s capital. “How is it Vienna was taken? What of
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and
the fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
The feeling, “It has begun! Here it is!” was seen even on Prince
the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his collar. Our
The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was already so
The foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a
the French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in
the French grenadier.
The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue
The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars
“The French have abandoned the left bank?”
The French onlookers and listeners laughed.
The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagratión,
the French were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
the front, but at Dürrenstein, where I was, our attack began after
the full significance of the words he heard.
The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian
The general frowned, turned away, and went on.
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the
The general’s face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took
The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid
the general... third company to the commander.” The words passed along
the general, who looked through his field glass.
The gentlemen assembled at Bilíbin’s were young, wealthy, gay society
The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.
the German landlord.
The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and
the German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were
The girl smiled and took it. Nesvítski like the rest of the men on the
the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
the ground, as a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim
the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clash
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkóv, familiar to the Pávlograds as
the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness
the honor of the flag... Well, never mind, it’s true I’m to blame,
“The hoof’s cracked! That’s nothing. I’ll teach you what to do
The horses’ croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at the
the house where the commander in chief was.
the hussar shouted back.
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices
The imposing figure of Nesvítski followed by his Cossack, and
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts
The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the
their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of
their bayonets and guns.
Their conversation would probably have been different but for the effect
their courage before him.
their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company
their journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
their way to negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing
the left! Wait a bit.” But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the
the line of retreat on the left by the French. However inconvenient the
the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.
the line that had so sharply divided the two armies?” he asked himself
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
the little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, its
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy
the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. And
the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being
them. All eyes fastened involuntarily on this French column advancing
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.
The man was wearing a bluish coat of broadcloth, he had no knapsack
the march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
    * The marshalls.
“The master is not in, he’s gone to headquarters,” said
the matter depended on my personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing the
the memory of a remote event long past.
them from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general
the mines and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the French
the Minister of War.”
the Minister of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general
the mud off his face with his sleeve. “Perched up there, you’re more
then, brothers, on to glory, led by Father Kámenski.” This song had
the new Campo Formio are to be drawn up.”
Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
The night he received the news, Kutúzov sent Bagratión’s vanguard,
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that
“Then I’ll have it brought round,” said Rostóv wishing to avoid
then particularly strong.
then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could
“Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?” inquired Túshin.
then, Wostóv, now then!”
The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the
the officers and men of Denísov’s squadron, though they tried to talk
The officers laughed.
the official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince
The old man was silent.
the old prince’s face.
The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his
(the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutúzov at Braunau) that
“The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,
the orders were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves
The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.
the other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes
the others. Again someone shouted, “Stretchers!” Four men seized the
the pained expression his joke had brought to his sister’s face, he
“The past always seems good,” said he, “but did not Suvórov
The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to
The Pávlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace
the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
The prince gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you,
the puhse?” he asked, turning to Rostóv.
The purse is here! I’ll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or
the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!
the ras...” he did not finish.
“so it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because
Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805.”
soldier at the front, gave the command “Attention!” and rode up
soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. “I’d shoot them,
soldiers’ bonfires and with his long gray mustache, his white chest
soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostóv, too, dragged himself to the
soldier shouted to him. “They’d kill you there!”
soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to
soldiers ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their
soldiers running in confused crowds across his path.
soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted “Hurrah!”
Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the
soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns
soldier with the harsh voice, and it was that affair and this soldier
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
so long waited, presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly
so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully
some!”
some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He
some not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in
Someone mentioned that Captain Túshin was bivouacking close to the
someone. (Prince Bagratión did not ask about the guns on the left
some question—“Most likely he is asking at what o’clock they
some sort were moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops;
something.”
something and went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was
something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not. But that’s
something I have received from the chancellor. I asked him for you, and
something large, brilliant, and handsome moving toward her as she
“Something special is always said in such cases,” he thought, but
something that was evidently wrong and that he ought not to do. But at
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
somewhere nearer the sun.”
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to
some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probably
“So much the better! I shall see it close,” he thought.
so my conscience was at ease. I came forward....” (Berg stood up and
son or kinsman.”
Sónya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
Sónya smiled.
Sónya smiled.
Sónya’s thin little shoulders, Natásha’s eyes and laughter,
Sónya, whom he loved and thought of just the same as ever.” When she
sooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror
sorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded and
so strange that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
“So the attack is definitely resolved on?” asked Bolkónski.
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle
sound of artillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of the crowd
sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade, but because as he drew
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night,
“So we are to have visitors, mon prince?” remarked Mademoiselle
“So you are still at that silly business!” quickly closed his eye
“So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?” Hélène
“So you think he is powerless?” said Langeron.
speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all. Anatole was not
speaking as if he were saying something which had long since been agreed
speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre’s
speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
spectacles.
speeches were intended for quite other conditions, they were for the
splashing with blood those near them.
spread by the fact that the Emperor’s carriage had really galloped
squadron. The day was bright and sunny after a sharp night frost, and
staff were not far off, in the village the vehicles were going to.
standard in hand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of
standing motionless; then he came to the region occupied by Uvárov’s
stand the sight of these unfortunates.
started,” thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with
state.”
stationed on the Pratzen Heights.
station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire the
“Stepping flat on his heels—we know what that means....”
steps, and again stopped.
“Still aching?” Túshin asked Rostóv in a whisper.
still feeling his eyes gazing at her.
still in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage. He
still there?”
“Still the same,” she said to her husband.
still was not in time to avoid them.
still when she’s fifty.”
stimulating effect on him. “Vive l’Empereur! l’Empereur!” he now
stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under the arms to
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
stood with his marshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was
stopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been an
Stopping in front of the Pávlograds, the Tsar said something in French
“Stop them!” he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing
“Stop those wretches!” gasped Kutúzov to the regimental commander,
stories of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent
stories of the Grand Duke’s quick temper he related with gusto how in
story of the misfortunes of some Mary Víktorovna or other. At the
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to
strange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches, just as a sailor is
strategic position where the operations would take place was familiar in
stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
stroked the animal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he
stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love in
struggle, but with naïve and lighthearted gaiety.
struggle to conquer that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing himself
study.
stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their
stumbled over it. Several of those present laughed.
stupidest remarks came out clever and apt. Now everything Pierre said
submissive general.
submit from habit, and she said: “I wish only to do your will, but if
submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women
succeeds. He sat motionless, looking at the heights visible above
success reached Kutúzov’s cheerless staff with the galloping advent
such a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!” he repeated, flushing suddenly.
such a plan in which the enemy’s position was assumed to be known,
such as might call for his rapidity of perception and decision.
such love as Sónya was speaking of. But Natásha had not yet felt
such silence and an anxiety to find something to say, the effect is
suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report,
suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.
suddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a
Suddenly Prince Bolkónski frowned.
suddenly transformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.
suffering?” suggested another voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did not
superior to Napoleon’s, were concentrated in one place, the troops
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
suppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile that had nothing
surroundings unable to find their own regiments. In this way the action
Suvórov’s time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors, that he
swarmed with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering
sweet wine, my dear, now that the time has come for these young ones to
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men—the
sympathize with him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
table seemed to feel this, and they forgot their duties as they looked
tache,” he thought. “There now... it’s not a tache... Natásha...
“Tafa-lafa! But what he’s jabbering no one can make out,” said a
tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor’s eye
take her for her connections and wealth. Are there no women living
taken from the prisoner.
taken, it was not his fault but the corporal’s who had sent him to
taken up their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were
“Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!” a
talk, but I don’t want to,” he seemed to say. Besides this, in his
talking of the Schön Grabern affair? Were you there?”
talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonaparte
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God’s
tell everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily,
tell the little countess!”
temper because Prince Vasíli was coming, or whether his being in a bad
temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasíli’s visit, he was
ten minutes. And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count
than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.
than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the
than anything else showed Pierre her superiority. She was right in
than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow were
than five hundred paces from where Kutúzov was standing, a dense French
thanked,” thought the overseer, “the storm has blown over!”
“Thank God!”
“Thank God!” said Prince Vasíli. “My wife has told me
“Thank God!” said Sónya, crossing herself. “But perhaps she
thanks to Princess Lise’s voice and little downy lip that lifted over
thank you with my whole heart.” To Rostóv every word sounded like a
“Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!” said Túshin.
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
that between the person they so address and themselves there are some
that column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen he
that day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer. “They
That day Nicholas Rostóv received a letter from Borís, telling him
that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: “What am I doing? I need
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle,
that fat one in spectacles” (that was how Pétya described his
that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall. Those
that he ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision,
that he should do the same. The rider, whose figure seemed familiar
That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar’s foot, in the narrow
that he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
that he was dangerously wounded.
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
that I am saying!” thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces
that I do not like him.”
“That is just why I do not begin, sire,” said Kutúzov in a
“That is no business of mine,” he thought. He had not ridden many
“That is probably the work of Vinesse,” said Pierre, mentioning
“That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!” he added
that it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of
that it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the
that it was not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was
that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would happen.
that?... Kindly do as you are ordered.”
that Kutúzov’s upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the
that led to his own apartments.
that moment Pierre felt that Hélène not only could, but must, be his
that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to
That never does any harm,” thought Anatole.
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, “If
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
“That’s admirable!” he shouted. “He will take you with your
“That’s a good thing, but don’t move from Prince Vasíli’s. It
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of
That same night, Rostóv was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front
that she winced and uttered a cry.
“That’s just it,” interrupted Dolgorúkov quickly, laughing.
that’s not it—that’s tomorrow. Oh yes! Natásha... sabretache...
that sort of man), he gave Borís a pleasant smile, frowned as with
that state of mind which makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and
that surrounded the Emperors.
that’s what I did.”
“that the Emperor will meet me and give me an order as he would to any
that the Ismáylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from
that the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
that the story about Sergéy Kuzmích, the laughter, and the food
that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard
that was dispersing on the hill lay still more densely below, where they
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew’s hands, but he
that were so agonizingly, incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and
that which had said: “The Pávlograd hussars?”
that while Napoleon’s proclamation was being read to the troops the
that white spot. “I expect it’s snow... that spot... a spot—une
the accountant with the naïve face was feeling its texture, shaking his
the accurate way characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of
the act of falling asleep. Rostóv lifted his head that had sunk almost
the address. “This letter would be of great use to you.”
the animated hum of several conversations. At one end of the table, the
“The Ápsherons must be stopped, your excellency,” cried he. But at
the arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both
the Austrian adjutant, he addressed Bolkónski.
the bald head. Véra, Natásha, Sónya, and Pétya now entered the room,
the battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pávlovna detained Pierre, looking
the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies open before you.”
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
the best post he could—preferably that of adjutant to some important
the bonfire, and addressing Túshin asked him to have the guns moved a
the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying
the carriage as pale as anything. How they made the four black horses
the cause of his grief.
the cause of justice against the enemy of the human race. Anna Pávlovna
The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
the cheerful glitter of that autumn day was in keeping with the news of
the clavichord, sang the tune. Bolkónski was not there. None of these
the column, gave him the order to advance.
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor’s
the contempt with which Rostóv, from his fighting army point of view,
the conversation to insignificant matters. Natásha, who, of the whole
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostóv, being the
The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied
the count and at Anna Mikháylovna, the latter very adroitly turned
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikháylovna’s hints at dinner.
The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.
The count sobbed yet more.
The crowd, pushing forward desperately, squeezed together, moved a few
The day after Rostóv had been to see Borís, a review was held of the
The day after the review, Borís, in his best uniform and with his
the Day. That’s what keeping one’s head means. That’s the way,
the decisive point, and gains the victory alone. “But death and
the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure, and that
“The devil knows! They’ve killed everybody! It’s all up now!”
the disordered battalion and at the enemy, “what’s that?”
“The dispositions!” exclaimed Kutúzov bitterly. “Who told you
the dispositions or anything else—he was engaged in satisfying the
The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They began as
the door, was sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing.
“The Eighteenth.”
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be
The Emperor drew level with Rostóv and halted. Alexander’s face was
The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not
the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the
the Emperor immediately!” thought Rostóv and galloped on.
The Emperor’s horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had
the Emperor’s suite. One officer told Rostóv that he had seen someone
the Emperor’s voice.
“The Emperor! The Emperor!” was suddenly heard among the hussars.
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
“The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from
“The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the
the enemy’s fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly
the experience of old Cunctators.”
the eyes of the Guardsman’s horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen
the face that emerged from the shirt.
the farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad on
the field of battle, who though still in some confusion were less
The fires and shouting in the enemy’s army were occasioned by the fact
“The first man that turns up—she forgets her father and everything
the first to catch his eye. He sent him.
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostóv was more and
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German
the French, galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, but
The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutúzov, were firing
The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
the front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family—the
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed
the general pleasure and disappoint everyone’s expectation. Prince
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
the gentlemen of the Tsar’s suite by his poor French.
the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced at Kutúzov and,
the glory of our arms and of the day’s work, they assumed a serious
the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
The Guards had gone to the front; Dólokhov had been reduced to the
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading
the guests. To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark
the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the
The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
the heavy standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole
the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostóv pretended not to hear
the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contrary
the honor, but I shall never be your son’s wife.”
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses.
The hussar did not reply.
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The sound
The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostóv’s head. Though
the inlaid portfolio. Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess
their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
their guns, were running toward him. He also saw French infantry
the large drawing room. Prince Vasíli came up to Pierre with languid
The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily
the left-flank columns had already descended.
the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutúzov had stopped and was
    * The little one is charming.
The little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received
The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face
the living charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that
the look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But
them.”
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.
them curiosity, awe, and even love—a supercilious consciousness of
them down! What?...” said Rostóv, waking up. At the moment he opened
The men and officers returning spoke of a brilliant victory, of the
the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of
them!” he reflected.
the middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It’s all those damned
them. If he is not rich I will give her the means; I will ask my
the mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostóv was happy
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy
the mist, and his cold face wore that special look of confident,
the mist. From information he had received the evening before, from the
them it was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, “Get on!
the more depressed.
the morning of the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz
themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered
themselves to Túshin in all their horror. He had been so excited that
them the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to lead
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.
then a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the village similar masses
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, his physician,
then he did everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle
the night ten miles from Olmütz and next morning were to come straight
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed
“Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?”
“Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you
The officers gathered round Denísov’s canteen, eating and talking.
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner.
the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed
the old count, the countess, Pétya, Véra, Natásha, and Sónya, and
The old prince did not sleep either. Tíkhon, half asleep, heard him
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using
The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her
the old prince. “Very, very glad to have seen you,” repeated he,
The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of
the one that will result from it will be as victorious! However, dear
the orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.
the party of the young had triumphed. The voices of those who counseled
“The Pávlograd hussars?” he inquired.
“The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. “God be
The prince looked at his daughter’s frightened face and snorted.
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,
The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
the ranks.
the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or around
the reception room, where he found some ten officers and generals.
(the reflection was still incomplete), he caught himself smiling and was
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
the regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,
“There he is!” said Borís, thinking Rostóv had said “His
there is hardly time to put in action—seeing Pierre, touched his
“There is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites
The remains of Langeron’s and Dokhtúrov’s mingled forces were
“There now! It’s true that all you women are crybabies,” remarked
“There now, the Kúrskies have also gone past,” was being said in
“The reserves, sire!” replied a voice, a very human one compared to
“There’s no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you
the rest.”
“There! They are bringing another!” cried one of the officers,
the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
there was no one beyond the ditch now. Only some carts and carriages
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pávlograd regiment,
There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent
there was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness
“There will be a council of war at Kutúzov’s tonight, though; you
the right they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct
the road he reined in his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or
the Russian with his heir the Tsarévich, and the Austrian with the
the salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his
the same time, my honored benefactor,” wrote Prince Vasíli. “My son
the scoundrels!”
the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line.
These sights and sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him;
the shirt.
the sight of the killed and wounded.
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagratión, apparently not wishing
the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. To
the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
the smoke, Rostóv hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where
“The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor.”
the soldier always has around him the same comrades, the same ranks, the
the soldiers’ faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the
the special deep cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting
the staff officer on duty.
the standard.
“The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!” thought Pierre,
the struggling men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who had
the sutlers. On receiving Borís’ letter he rode with a fellow officer
the table in a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of
The tall, fair-haired General Buxhöwden stood, leaning his back against
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her
the third division and convinced himself that there really were no
The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s, and Katie’s, who
the Thuerassa, he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all our
the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed
The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Nóvgorod and
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by
the Tsar!”
The Tsar addressed the officers also: “I thank you all, gentlemen, I
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutúzov’s eye
The Tsar said something more which Rostóv did not hear, and the
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.
the Tsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting
the Tverskáya Street rode the hussar with mustaches... I thought about
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, trying
the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutúzov was, stood on the
the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself, in another
the village letting the troops pass by him. That morning Kutúzov seemed
the visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
the wall, his eyes fixed on a burning candle, and seemed not to listen
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
the woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was mentioned
“The wound is not here, it is there!” said Kutúzov, pressing the
They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against the
They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
“They can’t be far off, probably just beyond the stream,” he said
they could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might: so thought
They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
“They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency.”
The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
They’re coming!” Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final
they seemed of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave
“They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in
“They were there this evening, but now I don’t know, your
they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair’s breadth.
thing he would have to unite his fate with hers. He might perhaps have
things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle Bourienne also shared them
things the old count sent to his son.
think could hardly be found nowadays—but is she contented with her
think, Count? The next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of
thinking? I mustn’t forget. How shall I speak to the Emperor? No,
think it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!” he still shouted
thin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But the
This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, was
this bone—a bill for thirty thousand rubles—to the poor princess
this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but as
This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostóv and his Bedouin over
this heart, so kind and generous? Say ‘perhaps’... The future is so
this indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything
this information, the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose
this instant!” thought Rostóv.
“This is all very fine, but things must be settled,” said Prince
this marriage. He recalled her former words and looks and the words
this may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor. It won’t be long
this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.
This short man nodded to Dolgorúkov as to an intimate friend and stared
this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face
this—want glory, want to be known to men, want to be loved by them, it
This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natásha looked
This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, and
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
those recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in
those who had been campaigning under Kutúzov. The two Emperors,
Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice
Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to
Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
thought and heard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the
thought. And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most
thought, as he listened to voices in Kutúzov’s courtyard. The voices
thought, he called Tíkhon and began to undress.
thought he, “I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there,
thought Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutúzov.
thought—referring to the little princess who was not in the dining
thought Rostóv. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostóv
thought Rostóv. “I should die of happiness!”
thoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or a
thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after the charge.
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutúzov’s
through the conservatories, the serfs’ quarters, and the outbuildings,
Tíkhon knew his master’s habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
Tíkhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
till he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity—the eager talk, running to
till then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and
till then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
time!”
time.
time, muttering to herself.
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
time to get his uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with
timidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
tiptoe to the countess’ door and paused.
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
“Tit! I say, Tit!” said the groom.
to Bagratión which the old countess at Anna Mikháylovna’s advice had
to bear the looks turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall,
to be heard.
to be reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders), yet the troops
to credit it, bent his head, and told Túshin that he could go. Prince
to cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feeling
today for the Emperor.” Dolgorúkov smiled significantly.
Today was a great day for him—the anniversary of his coronation.
to demonstrate the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan,
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps
to do with Sergéy Kuzmích—a smile of bashfulness at their own
to each couple of acres. The wounded crept together in twos and threes
to everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little
to her.
to her and kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
to her but to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne’s little
to her shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
to him: “I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?”
to himself, but which formed the whole interest of his life,
to his horse’s mane and pulled up beside the hussar. He was succumbing
to irresistible, youthful, childish drowsiness. “But what was I
told him to expect.
told them all that.
to make reflections or think aloud in her company, and she had always
to me after the review and we will do what is possible.”
to Milorádovich who was near him.
tomorrow.”
tomorrow! Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You
tomorrow,” or, “Be in to dinner or I shall not see you,” or, “I
“Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached
“Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the
too.
took her hand and begged her forgiveness, without knowing what for.
to Olmütz, dined there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone
to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and looked
to read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me,
to remain for a few weeks longer in the house she so loved and where
to remain so for a hundred years; but the moment comes when the lever
to restrain his laughter.
to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped. But
to Rostóv and involuntarily riveted his attention, made a gesture of
to Rostóv when the animal was handed over to the hussar.
to say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking
to say more in the presence of a stranger.
to shout: “Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!” did not
to show her fear of Anna Pávlovna. She looked at her niece, as if
to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to.
to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their faces
to state his views plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on
to sympathize in any way.
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.
to the Emperor shocked Rostóv. Rostóv saw how the Emperor’s rather
to the Emperors with a salute. His whole appearance and manner were
to the first squadron?”
to the Guards’ camp to find his old playmate. Rostóv had not yet had
“To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernement
to the hussar beside him.
To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forces
to the maid, “bring the princess her gray dress, and you’ll see,
to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet
to the princess.
to the review, reaching the field at Olmütz by ten o’clock.
to the Tsar or to Kutúzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?
to the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were going
to the views of the old generals Kutúzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it
touched Pierre: he looked at Hélène and she too seemed disconcerted,
touching Bonaparte’s.
touch with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was
to walk up and down before it.
Toward evening Dolgorúkov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and
toward the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars, several
toward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more denuded by
to. Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy’s picket
to Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never left
tried to conceal them.
trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to
triumph.
triumph.
triumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him,
troops, he saw, near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men
troops were moving in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of
troops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagratión as a schoolboy who
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.
try to do all I can for your happiness.”
Tsar and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve.
Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front
turned away and went down the side of the corridor.
Turning the horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially
turning to Anatole, “come here, let us talk and get acquainted.”
turning to Prince Vasíli and answering his imploring look. “Yes, or
turn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the
“Turn this way!” he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked
Túshin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that
Túshin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight,
Túshin’s large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and
Túshin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier
twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Milorádovich in a military pose, his
two Cossacks.
two seconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on in
unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
under fire for the first time.
under one command, and in a like order.
understand it’!... And I ask you!”
understood her and made up my mind what she really is. Was I mistaken
understood that this woman might belong to him.
understood what was happening as little as he did.
under the table.
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
unexpectedly through his mind.
unexpectedly to go into action. Rostóv without hearing Borís to the
unfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! And, oh God, how passionately
unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate. The angry eldest
ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
uniformed Austrian officer.
uniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him and
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
unmarried, and even the happier for it?” So thought Prince Bolkónski
unmask his deceivers!” And in order to realize vividly his love
unmelted snow, or some white houses? He even thought something moved on
unnatural smile. “I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasíli has
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpátych to kiss, and then
unpleasantly excited expression.
unwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.
unwell today? Eh? Afraid of the ‘minister’ as that idiot Alpátych
unwounded—it was they who were crushing, weighing down, and twisting
up at all!”
up like a fool!” he thought, looking irritably at her. “She is
upon and could not now be altered. “We start tomorrow and I’m giving
upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful
upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutúzov’s
up on the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the
up out of the mist.
up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when you get to
up to the appearance of the pauvre mère; they understood that they had
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, but
us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But this is what we’ll do: I have
used for dancing, but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of
used to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with
vainly trying to master her agitation.
valet can go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearly forgetting,” he added.
valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy’s ranks, but should
value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this
vanguard, rewards were promised, and the men received a double ration of
various kinds: a table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest
varying expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted
Vasíli and his son.
Vasíli had only acquired by imitating other parents.
Vasíli. “I know something about that. Don’t I? And you are still so
Vasíli, in the rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre’s
Vasíli one day, closing his eyes and fingering Pierre’s elbow,
Vasíli’s house in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and
Vasíli to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that
very fields where the French had now to be fought; the adjacent
Very fine!”
“Very good, very good,” said Bagratión. “Thank you, officer.”
very likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these
“Very well, then, be so good as to wait,” said Prince Andrew to the
victory be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Emperor
victory or defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your
victory which was conveyed, not only by the tales of those who had taken
village and had already been sent for.
village!” he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. “Don’t
village of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officer
village. Tell it to stop and await my orders.”
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the
visible through the smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrow
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
vocation is to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness
vodka. The campfires crackled and the soldiers’ songs resounded
voice calling him by name.
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect of
voice, popped her head in at the door.
voices, and the army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles
voice trembled.) “I loved your father... and she will make you a good
voice, “you were pleased to send me to Captain Túshin’s battery. I
von Bergs—have been knights!”
Vyazmítinov, the new military governor general of Petersburg, had
“Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening.”
waited impatiently for Prince Andrew’s return from the commander in
waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that
waiting to hear whether he would say anything more. But Kutúzov, with
“Waiting, Your Majesty,” repeated Kutúzov. (Prince Andrew noted
walked away from the fire.
wall. On this knoll there was a white patch that Rostóv could not at
wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a
warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the
warrior doing some kind of man’s work of his own, without help or
was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It
was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he
was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful
was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not
was being done was not his adjutant’s fault, and still not answering
was bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heart was full of
was charmant. Even if Anna Pávlovna did not say so, he could see that
was ecstatically conscious of his approach. He felt it not only from the
was evidently one, Rostóv felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from
was, for something could be descried. On the right the Guards were
was fought.
was growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the
was heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
was in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperors
was in his place, waiting.
was in the right so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... ‘Hey,
was laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping
was lost. No one whom Rostóv asked could tell him where the Emperor
was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had
was not behaving very well in this matter. “Youth, frivolity... well,
was nothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards
was. Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now,
wasn’t it?”
was on duty and that he should go through the door on the left into the
was out of the question, “I am in love with your brother once for all
was perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer into
was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and among the troops
was said.
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
was sitting at a small table, chattering with Másha, her maid. She grew
was sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the
was so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive
was something black, now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy
was taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince
was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son’s
was the Emperors’ suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
was thinking of. Yes, Na-tásha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That’s
was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all
watchword—shaft, Olmütz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in
water.
way and attaching him to himself! What if he gave me a place near him?
way of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at the
way,” said an officer.
way, with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who had
weariness and assurance, as if he were adding every time: “You know
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty and
we could not think how to address the reply! If not as ‘Consul’
Wednesday’s meeting of the Imperial Council, at which Sergéy Kuzmích
“We drove them back!” said Borís with animation, growing talkative.
“Well, all right, all right.”
“Well, and so he never got farther than: ‘Sergéy Kuzmích’?”
“Well and then?” asked the other voice. “If before that you are
Well, are you off to the front?”
“Well, as you see. So far everything’s all right, but I confess I
“Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can’t part from
“Well, go and see,” he said, after a pause.
“Well, have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let’s have
“Well, how are you going to get out of that?” he remarked.
“Well! How d’ye do? How d’ye do? Glad to see you!”
“Well, how d’you do, my dear fellow?” said Dolgorúkov, who was
“Well, I don’t know. It’s awkward and would make me ashamed.”
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!” she said. And
“Well, I will leave you in your little corner,” came Anna
“Well, Lëlya?” he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
“Well, my dear boy, I hear you’ve been educated abroad, not taught
“Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have
“Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last,” said Prince
“Well, now we’ll arrange something quite simple and becoming,” she
“Well?” returned the old man.
“Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?”
“Well, so that’s finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have
“Well then,” Prince Andrew answered himself, “I don’t know
“Well, they’ve sent you a tidy sum,” said Berg, eying the heavy
“We’ll try to,” replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing
went out after shaking hands with Dolgorúkov and Bilíbin.
went out of the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvítski and began
went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two
went to her father’s room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne
were all a pretense, and that the whole attention of that company was
were already up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they
were constantly shaping themselves in his mind, arising from the
were descending. In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another,
were flocking in to look at him. Prince Bagratión was thanking the
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.
were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds
were moving in the same direction. Every soldier felt glad to know that
were passing by. From one of the drivers he learned that Kutúzov’s
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,
were there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
were those of the orderlies who were packing up; one voice, probably a
were throwing everything superfluous, made the eyes smart. It was cold
were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The sound
“We shall probably advance,” replied Bolkónski, evidently reluctant
“We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven’t got
“the rat”) he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both
the rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, “which is also
the rearguard by the commander in chief, was sitting on the trail of a
the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country through
“There, Fedótov, you should be quartered on them!”
therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count
therefore—this is between ourselves—I instinctively feel that we
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by
The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup
The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered the
(The regimental commander’s face now that the inspection was happily
The regimental commander sought out Dólokhov in the ranks and, reining
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed
the regiment I’d... Ah well, I’ll show that in action, and for me
the regiment Kutúzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dólokhov was
the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
there?” he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy
“There... he’s puffing again,” muttered Túshin to himself, as a
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne....”
there is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and
“There is still much, much before us,” he said, as if with an old
“There, it’s just as I thought,” said Rostóv to himself. “He
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up
there many more of you to come?”
“There now! Confess that this is delightful,” said he. “This
“There now! Didn’t I tell you, Michael Mítrich, that if it was said
“There now, Prince! We can’t stop those fellows,” said the staff
“There now!” said the officer of the suite, “that’s
“There now, Zíkin, they ought to put you on a horse. You’d look
the report of musketry.
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten
the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more
“There’s nothing to be gay about,” answered Bolkónski.
“There’s plenty to do still.”
there’s some mistake,” thought he. “They can’t have wanted to
there! Tea!”
the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.
there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvítski, who had
There was not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he
there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and again that
there was nothing to be said, and neither wished to give occasion for
There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over
the right and sent an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the
the right flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged
the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the
the Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing
The Russian Emperor’s aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front
the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
These gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs;
these,” he said, handing him several papers, “make a neat memorandum
the sergeant major with brightened expressions, licking their lips and
The Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!” And he went on
the shed with super human force, throwing up a mass of earth. The ground
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same
“The soldiers say it feels easier without boots,” said Captain
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dólokhov. Prince Andrew
the soldier. “Turn back with your slut!”
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. The
The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now
the sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked with
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without
The squadron in which Rostóv was serving had scarcely time to mount
“The squadron quartermaster!” said Lavrúshka.
“The squadwon can’t pass,” shouted Váska Denísov, showing his
the staff captain.
the staff captain, “but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God
the staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.
The staff captain, Kírsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for
The staff captain’s voice began to tremble. “You have been in the
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into one
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,
the subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
the suite pointed out to Bagratión a French column that was outflanking
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
The third company was the last, and Kutúzov pondered, apparently trying
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his
the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so
the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.
The two Pávlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up the
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlóvski, who was
the village again, but Túshin’s guns could not move, and the
the waiter.
the war is over, that the Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with
the water, and approaches the tête-de-pont. At length appears the
the way from Ulm, while Dólokhov maintained that the Russians had not
the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward
The weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending
the weight of his knapsack.
the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building
“The wife!” said the old prince, briefly and significantly.
the wild set led by Dólokhov. Zherkóv had met Dólokhov abroad as a
the wind.
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,
the woman’s vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokes
the women.”
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a
the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and
the worst,” said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done
they assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on
they both felt happy). “We had our hands full last night. However, I
They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and
“They don’t even give one time to dwink!” answered Váska
they do the guns.”
They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression
they halted in silence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from the
They’ll ransack that castle,” he remarked with evident approval.
“They march splendidly,” remarked someone in Bagratión’s suite.
“They might call a halt here or we’ll have to do another four miles
“They must be feeling dull, too,” said one of the bolder officers,
the young prince. The members of the household were all gathered in the
“They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of
“They’re coming!... they’re coming!... Stand aside, make way,
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be
They stood silent, facing one another. The old man’s sharp eyes were
They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant
They were again silent.
they were as usual laughing.
they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no
they would have remained there for a long time testing each other’s
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
thing.”
things,” and the skin over his left temple puckered, “either you
thinking about you. Why are you going?”
think the regiment is not a bad one, eh?”
think we thoroughly understand.
“Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as
third company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this,
thirtieth he attacked Mortier’s division, which was on the left bank,
this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental commander, for
this disorder,” he muttered. “Do as you like.”
This expression evidently pleased him.
this house and in Brünn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I
    * “This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince.”
“This is Dólokhov,” said Prince Andrew.
“This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is
This meant that Tíkhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.
this uncertainty and hurry... There—they are shouting again, and
This very sentence about Countess Zúbova and this same laugh Prince
this victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which was
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He
This was particularly noticeable on Nesvítski’s usually laughing
those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvórov couldn’t manage them so
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
though the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
thought: “I am going to save the army.”
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the
thoughts.
thoughts rather than the trend of the conversation—“and that’s a
thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years’ service who
thought. The minister drew the remaining papers together, arranged them
though what happened was due to chance and was independent of the
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
thousand men breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did
thousand men each of whom knew his place and his duty, had every button
threatened by the French) but at Brünn. Despite his apparently delicate
“Three and a half miles, Your Majesty.”
through him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
throughout the whole cavalry division as Váska Denísov. Cadet Rostóv,
Through the door came the sounds of Kutúzov’s voice, excited and
through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse’s head. It was
thud of the enemy’s cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring
thumb to the room where Telyánin was sitting, he frowned and gave a
time could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.
time in the shop.
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: “The
Timókhin, armed only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such
Timókhin to the subaltern beside him.
tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his
to abandon the road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia,
to adopt a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his
to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and
to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
“To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father’s character sometimes
To be so sent meant not only a reward but an important step toward
“To be sure, your excellency,” replied the architect.
to be talking to a staff officer of such importance. “It’s a lovely
to blame all round. Well, what else do you want?...”
to do but dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who’s
toes toward the general. The captain’s face showed the uneasiness of
to execute an order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly dressed
to fire the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last
together. The German, Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to
together, thundered on the right and in the center, while the capotes
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
to greet the young man.
to Grunth to find Prince Bagratión. He heard the cannonade behind him
to hear the details.”
to her.”
to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these
to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on having
to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostóv ran up to him with
to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace,” said she in a voice
to his adjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the
to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real
to indicate that he was about to say something witty. “Buonaparte?”
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
told him, and said, “Very good!” in a tone that seemed to imply that
told him the whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped
told him what he had seen.
to look under the uniforms he would have found on every man a clean
to move from right to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the
tomowwow,” muttered Denísov.
        To my native land...”
tone of entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who
tones.
to notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet’s
took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry and
took her sister-in-law’s arm and drew her into another room.
took him by the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to
took it...” he whispered just above Telyánin’s ear.
took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off.
to pass the time.”
To please you...” said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing
to present the regiment in parade order, on the principle that it is
To PRINCE MURAT,
to provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
to rest after their hard marches.
to retreat along the road from Krems to Olmütz, to unite with the
to Rostóv’s face, and his sobs were audible.
to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the troops
to slip in over there.”
to stop and fire the bridge.”
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander in chief
to the accountant, “but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach
“To the army.”
to the devil, I’m busy!” he shouted to Lavrúshka, who went up to
“To the Emperor.”
to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
to the end, without raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the
to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the
to the French sword and pouch. “I have taken an officer prisoner. I
to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.
to the general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat
to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats
to then been in regular order and silent began to sway and stretch and
to the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and
to the prince that if these battalions went away, the guns would remain
to the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there, drowning
to the ranks,” said the captain softly.
to the removal of the guns.
“To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find
to the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagratión was to make this march without
to think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with
to Túshin’s battery had been moved away in the middle of the action
touching his horse and turning purple in the face. “Vill you be so
     * To understand all is to forgive all.
to unload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home as
to what he dreaded more than anything in the world—to ridicule; but
town knows?”
traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officers
trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,
traveling effects of Prince Andrew’s were in very good order: new,
treading heavily he stepped down from the carriage just as if those two
tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried close
treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her
triumphant, cheerful face.
triumphantly and gaily.
troops arriving from Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
troops on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself
troops were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number
troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes
trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines.
trouvez là le mot pour rire,” * he said, as if strengthening his
truce and a capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the following
“True enough,” answered Nesvítski; “two smart fellows could have
true Gascon) and says: ‘I don’t recognize the world-famous Austrian
trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to
trying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, not
trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice.
trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all
turn away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always
turned from Captain Timókhin again flitted over his face. He turned
turned round. The officer evidently had complete control of his face,
turned their horses away. The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack,
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace
turned to Zherkóv. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance
turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms,
turning into the village already... they will have their buckwheat
Túshin.
Túshin’s battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one
Túshin’s battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the
Túshin’s guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was
Túshin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing
Túshin’s wattle shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on
Túshin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned
Túshin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to
twinkled and looked out straight.
twitched its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting
two.”
two.
two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had
two front teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end
two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.
“Two, I think.”
Two of the enemy’s shots had already flown across the bridge, where
twot fo’ward!”
“Ugh! I don’t like that fellow,” he said, regardless of the
“Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!” said Nesvítski; “they are
unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
unaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but over
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed
“Und die ganze Welt hoch!” *
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army’s position, and
understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
“Under the lower pillow.”
“Und vivat die ganze Welt!” Though neither the German cleaning his
unfastened cloak, wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled
uniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,
uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again
uniforms and groups with horses, easily recognizable as artillery.
unwounded. The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, and
up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly
up!” came the company commander’s voice in jaunty tones. The
up for lost time.
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps
up the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother
up to Denísov’s squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostóv,
up to the commander in chief, and presented arms.
up to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
up to Túshin.
up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlóvski’s
urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
us. But Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been
used to be. Don’t judge Lise harshly,” she began. “She is so
used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his good-natured, pale,
ushering Bolkónski in. “So you’re a messenger of victory, eh?
us nice news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one
us. To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince
usual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make
vanished from his face.
very decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my calèche.”
“Very good,” answered Nesvítski.
“Very good!” said Bagratión.
very important.”
very muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived
very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
very trying,” said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their
very wise, because you can take everything along with you—vodka and
victory. His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I
victory, what effect would that have on the general course of events?
Vienna as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable
Vienna. Kutúzov with his transport had still to march for some days
views by this French sentence. “C’est bien pour un garçon de rien
village. “Very good!” said Bagratión in reply to the officer’s
vish to destroy my men for your pleasure!”
visible as if but a stone’s throw away, and the movements of the
vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to
Vladímir medal and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered, the
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
voice, and Lieutenant Telyánin, a small officer of the same squadron,
voice, opening his door.
voice suddenly shrieked: “but if I hear that you have not behaved like
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces
voice. “There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it
voice which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and
“Voilà l’agrément des camps, monsieur le prince,” * said the
votre victoire n’est pas des plus victorieuses.” *
“Vous voyez le malheureux Mack,” he uttered in a broken voice.
“Wait a bit and listen. It’s fine!” answered Sídorov, who was
“Wait, haven’t you dropped it?” said Rostóv, picking up the
“Wait, I have not finished...” he said to Prince Andrew, seizing
walk to meet him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always,
war or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and to
was.
was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front
was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the
was a stroke of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and
was a young horse Telyánin had sold to Rostóv.)
was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An
was fully described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that
was happy. “Left... left... left...” he seemed to repeat to himself
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he
was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground,
was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our right flank was
“Was Kutúzov well? When had he left Krems?” and so on. The Emperor
was large and of an old pattern. The French swarming round their guns
was “not a whit worse than you or I.” At dinner the prince usually
“wasn’t I telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material
“Wasn’t it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still
was only redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrown back like birds
was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently into the commander’s face,
was particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery
was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. “Hark to him
was saying.
was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders were much
was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
“Was that grapeshot?” he asked Denísov.
was the name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which
was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches
was true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation
was very valuable. Officers who approached him with disturbed
was warm blood under his arm. “No, I am wounded and the horse is
was writing. “I’ll do it.”
watched him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the
waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway
waving it above his head cried:
way,” he added in Russian—but pronouncing the word with a French
way!... Let us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I’ll hack
“We all have our weaknesses,” said Kutúzov smiling and walking away
“Weally! And I’ve been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a
weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men
“We are to spend the night in Znaim.”
weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
weary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the
weary of it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and
‘We don’t love people so much for the good they have done us, as
weep without knowing why—rode behind on his artillery nag. Though
We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with
“We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off,”
weight.
welcome for the approaching chief.
well.”
“Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable,
“Well, aren’t you ashamed of yourself, Captain Túshin?” he
“Well, au revoir, Bolkónski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back early to
“Well done, lads!” said Prince Bagratión.
we’ll fire off some cannon! But this sort of thing seems done
“Well, fwiend? So you’ve smelt powdah!” shouted Váska Denísov
“Well, good-by, Prince,” said he to Bagratión. “My blessing, and
“Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier?
“Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must
“Well, have you finished?” said he to Kozlóvski.
“Well!” he said, turning to his wife.
“Well, he’s really a good fellow, one can serve under him,” said
“Well, I am taking it off,” replied Lavrúshka’s voice.
“Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses,” said
“Well, is it true that it’s peace and capitulation?” asked
“Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they
“Well, it’s as you like,” said the staff captain. “And what has
“Well, it seems that no one has noticed,” thought Rostóv. And this
“We’ll make you dance as we did under Suvórov...,” * said
“Well, maybe!” said Prince Andrew. “Go, Másha; I’ll come
“Well, Michael Ivánovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time
“Well, Michael Mítrich, sir?” he said, addressing one of the
well, never mind, here you are.”
“Well, never mind; I only...”
“Well now, gentlemen,” said Bilíbin, “Bolkónski is my guest in
“Well, now, good-by!” He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced
“Well, now tell me about your exploits,” said he.
“Well, of course, of course!”
well, only a little bruised just here,” he added, pointing with a
“Well, Prince?” asked Kozlóvski.
“Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Túshin,” it said.
“Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for giving
“Well, thank God! We’ve been sitting here too long!”
“Well, that’s all right,” continued the regimental commander. “A
“Well, that’s only till the first engagement.”
“Well, then go off to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne,
“Well there certainly are disgusting people,” thought Rostóv as he
“Well, till we meet again...” he said, holding out his hand to
“Well, what about it?” said he to Denísov. “It won’t come to a
“Well, why don’t you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as a
“Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?” he asked. (Rook
“Well, young man?” he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted
“Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your
“Well, you’ve told me nothing new,” and the old man repeated,
    * “We must let him off the u!”
“We must let him see Amelie, she’s exquisite!” said one of
went to the carriage.
were concentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on
were crossing themselves. Rostóv no longer looked at the colonel, he
we’re getting it still worse,” said Nesvítski. “But sit down and
“We’re going into action, gentlemen!”
were near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau.”
were not in very good condition), and instantly the squares that had up
were only 217 sick and stragglers. Everything was in good order except
were really given, but that Prince Bagratión tried to make it appear
were saying. Suddenly, however, he was struck by a voice coming from the
were sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out.
were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives were
Were the Potëmkins, Suvórovs, and Orlóvs Germans? No, lad, either you
were there,” thought Rostóv. “In myself alone and in that sunshine
“We’re to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
were turned against the ten-gun battery. Túshin’s companion officer
were using their ramrods, others putting powder on the touchpans or
were waiting for them to come out.
“We shall see.”
“Wetched business,” he muttered to himself. “How much is left in
“Wetched!” he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.
“We’ve given it ‘em hot, mate! They won’t make another push
“We’ve said good-by. Go!” he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry
“What about capitulation?”
“What about your master?” he asked Lavrúshka, Denísov’s orderly,
“What a clever man your father is,” said she; “perhaps that is why
“What a dandy you are today!” said Nesvítski, looking at
“What a fine fellow you are, friend!” said the Cossack to a convoy
“What an extraordinary genius!” Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
“What, are you wounded, my lad?” said Túshin, approaching the gun
“What?” asked the commander.
“What brings you here?” cried the officers turning to the newcomer.
what chance has Michael Kutúzov? No, my dear boy,” he continued,
“What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is
“What did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?” came
what do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring
“What do you thank me for?”
“What do you want, your honor?” asked an artilleryman, standing
whatever.
“Whatever is this? This!” he shouted and stood still. “Commander
whatever the import of his work. It was not the question “What for?”
Whatever we may say about the soul going to the sky... we know there is
“What good are they? They’re led about just for show!” remarked
“What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was
what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
“What is bad, Father?”
what is beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That’s so,
“What is it, dear?”
“What is it?” he asked.
“What is it? What?” asked both princesses when they saw for a moment
“What is the commander in chief doing here?” he asked.
what is there? Who is there?—there beyond that field, that tree, that
what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to,
“What news, sir?” asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a
“What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?”
“What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?”
    * “What’s he singing about?”
what she was holding in her reticule.) “So you promise?”
“What’s it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that
what’s one to do?” and, having given his order, he returned to
“What’s that that has fallen?” asked the accountant with a naïve
“What’s the matter?” exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in
“What’s the matter? I only congratulated them,” said Zherkóv.
what’s the matter with you? You must be ill to shiver like that,” he
“What’s to be done? She’s pretty! I will do everything. Make your
what was approaching in the distance from the opposite side—the blue
“What? What? How dare you? What?” said Telyánin.
wheels and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine that
wheels and working the screws himself.
“When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I...”
“When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let
when he saw the minister seated at a large table reading some papers
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
When Rostóv went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the
“When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable
When Telyánin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in
when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly
when they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his
“Where are headquarters?”
“Where are you going?” asked an infantry officer who was eating an
“Where are you off to?” he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had
“Where? At Bykov’s, at the rat’s... I knew it,” replied a piping
“Where have you put it, Wostóv?”
“Where is Dólokhov?” asked Kutúzov.
“Where is the commander in chief?” asked Bolkónski.
Where’s the victory?”
“Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?” said an
“Where to?”
“Where to?”
where Túshin’s guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a
whether he was speaking in jest or in earnest. “Ah, your excellency!
which at least half of them would be left on the field. After passing a
which did not leave his eager face. “Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen!
which had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the
which he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually
which seemed to say that he was not blaming anyone, but could not help
which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He
which the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.
which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also,
which was offered him. Telyánin for some reason had been transferred
whistling, singing, and hissing continually around them. He spoke in the
white foam from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his
white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with
white horse, was Prince Bagratión. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
white one, the white one!”
whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
white teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which
who, angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast
who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing but good,
(who gazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not Russians, the
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.
who had marched so gaily and complacently. But at the moment the first
who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of
who, jesting and laughing, stared at their strange foreign enemies.
whole army.”
whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle seemed
who, liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
whom all the regiment knew for a rogue.
“Whom shall I announce?”
who on Kutúzov’s staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian
“Whose company?” asked Prince Bagratión of an artilleryman standing
“Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It’s the
“Who’s that curtseying there? Cadet Miwónov! That’s not wight!
“Who’s that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Come
“Who told you that? Who?” cried the prince. “Suvórov!” And he
who was a secretary to the embassy, Bolkónski was already acquainted.
“Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat...
“Why are they down on me?” thought Túshin, looking in alarm at his
“Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to
“Why are you so glum?” asked Nesvítski noticing Prince Andrew’s
“Why didn’t you capture one, just one, marshal for us?”
“Why didn’t you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you
“Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic
“Why, have you too much money?”
“Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount,” he said.
“Why talk nonsense? Say what you want.”
“Why,” thought Prince Andrew, “that’s the captain who stood up
wider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
will be cut off,” said he.
will begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you’re a fool.
will come back in a rage. Will you have coffee?”
willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the
will not reach your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will
will slash at him!” thought Rostóv, gripping the hilt of his saber.
“Will they burn the bridge or not? Who’ll get there first? Will they
window. Nesvítski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
wind to carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were
wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to
wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling
wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. All their faces were
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on
wishes to stay with me, let him... he’ll be of use here if he’s a
wishes to test me!” His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up to
wishing to rid himself of this staff officer’s company, “please
wish to be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage he
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
with a clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly
with a mournful expression.
with an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, “I felt like
with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
with a sinking heart—watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright
with a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
with evident pleasure.
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting
with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince
with him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted
with himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighter
with him. There now, Sídorov!”
with his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily
with his glittering, black eyes at Rostóv.
with his thin legs, went up to Kutúzov.
within grapeshot range now.”
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
with jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the
without boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm...”
without eating.”
without his boots (he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry),
without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into
without losing step, his whole powerful body turning flexibly. It was as
without support. Prince Bagratión turned to the officer and with his
without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the
without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a
with pleasure to his own voice. “All I can say, General, is that if
with Prince Bagratión’s detachment.”
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyánin handed him the
with silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber—a present from
with such exactitude that Nesvítski could not help laughing. Kutúzov
with the river between himself and the main body of the French. On the
With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightly with
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
with thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He
with trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself,
with upraised arms.
with you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not
    * “Woman is man’s companion.”
women.
wood.
word; and he sat down at the nearest table.
word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.
words: “Morning dawned, the sun was rising,” and concluding: “On
words), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded looked
worse than others.”
“Wostóv, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove the
“Wostóv, you’ve not been playing schoolboy twicks...”
would appear as he passed the commander.
would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutúzov decided
would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,
would magnanimously extend the hand of reconciliation.
“Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?” he said.
would take place on this side of it...
wounded, and one knocked out,” he added, unable to restrain a happy
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter
wounded officer?”
wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. As a mark
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness
wrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at another
write, told Rostóv the contents of his letter.
writing, so that his quill spluttered and squeaked. “If you have
yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and that
“Yes and no mistake!” cried Denísov. “You worked like wegular
“Yes, bring some.”
“Yes, it’s a nice purse. Yes, yes,” he said, growing suddenly
“Yes, let’s go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese,”
“Yes, one is afraid,” continued the first speaker, he of the
“Yes, please do,” answered the general, and he repeated the order
“Yes, please do,” said Rostóv.
“Yes,” said Rostóv as if it cost him a great deal to utter the
“Yes, so it is, so it is,” said the general angrily, lowering the
yesterday’s order. Have you got it, Denísov?”
“Yes, that all happened!” he said, and, smiling happily to himself
“Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It’s
“Yes, the ham was just delicious...” answered another with a loud
“Yes, yes,” muttered Bagratión as if considering something, and he
“Yes, your excellency,” answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his
yet. He felt that he must not say it.
     you.”
you?”
you.”
you, all!” he added in a tone of command.
“we will talk of it later” (and he looked round at Rostóv). “Come
Weyrother.
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was
Weyrother, hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on
Weyrother’s had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began
Weyrother’s name, or even the term “dispositions.”
Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by his
“What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?” he said in
what am I to do if I love nothing but fame and men’s esteem? Death,
“What?” answered the old man absent-mindedly.
“What are they about?” thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them.
“What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?” she
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack,” Prince
“What a style! How charmingly he describes!” said she, reading the
“What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time.
“What can it be?” he thought. “The enemy in the rear of our army?
“What delicacy!” thought the princess. “Is it possible that
“What devil brought them here?” thought he, while Tíkhon was
what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son
“What division are you?” shouted an adjutant, riding up.
“What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is
“What does that prove?” he was saying as Rostóv rode up. “They
“Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?” said Bilíbin, who,
what happiness it would be to die—not in saving the Emperor’s life
“What?” he answered, not recognizing Borís.
what he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. “What are
what is going on around them.
“What is it?”
what is it I am attached to, Papa?” said Anatole, turning to his
“What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them
“What nonsense! Much I need it!” said Rostóv, throwing the letter
“What’s that? What do you make of it?” said Rostóv to the hussar
“What’s this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way,” thought he,
“What stupid orders! They don’t themselves know what they are
“What’s your name?”
what there is in you.”
“What was it?”
what will happen and don’t want to know, and can’t, but if I want
“What! You don’t remember Borís?” asked Sónya in surprise.
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the
whence—a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral
“When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmütz?” repeated
When Germans start being accurate, there’s no end to it!”
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and
When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (with
when he first loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he
When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some
when he stayed in (as he said) for Pierre’s sake, hardly exchanged a
when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic
when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Borís, Prince
“When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasíli and his son were already
When Prince Vasíli returned to the drawing room, the princess, his
When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty. Anatole stood
When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother’s voice ceased, Kutúzov opened
When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses, Kírsten filled
when the princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the
When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again
When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also
when the subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the
When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were
“Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and
where a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled,” said
“Where are you off to?” asked Borís.
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.
where he could never have expected the enemy to be.
where he was staying, and had been absurd, excited, and foolish in
where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
“Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutúzov?” Rostóv kept asking
“Where is the princess?” he asked. “Hiding?”
where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he
where to find me, but don’t forget that I do not regard either myself
where you always ran away; you remember cette chère Annette!”
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
which an enormous map of the environs of Brünn was spread out.
which attracted him. He very readily took up Borís’ cause and went
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
which he had come out was thronged with calèches, carriages of all
which he had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small gray Arab
(which he very likely would be), and found the commander in chief
which I shall lead the army.”
which is the only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position.”
which Nicholas Rostóv served and which was in Prince Bagratión’s
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the feeble, round-shouldered
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
which the prince had retained for himself.
which was not clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit his
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was
which were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French
which were uppermost in his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew
(which would be very difficult), he would not be able to get back before
while dressing, and yet the question he was always putting off demanded
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, that
While Rostóv was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
while we, on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his
whirled round it at full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon,
whispered to him. “This happiness is for those who have not in them
white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the other who
“Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will
who at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the
“Who can tell, your honor?” replied the hussar reluctantly.
who had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses.
“Who is it you want?” he asked. “The commander in chief? He was
“Who? Kutúzov?” asked Rostóv.
whole mass of men was concentrated.
who made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot
who remained behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
“Who’s that? Why? Wait a moment!” Anatole’s face seemed to say.
“Who the devil has put the logs on the road?” snarled he.
who was reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my
who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow’s
“Who was that?” asked Borís.
who will not refuse to accompany you.”
“Why?”
“Why?”
“Why aren’t you beginning, Michael Ilariónovich?” said the
“Why are you crying, Mamma?” asked Véra. “From all he says one
Why are you hindering us?” Another in the same place turned round and
“Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
Why doesn’t the Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the
“Why doesn’t the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed?
“Why, don’t you hear it?” Rostóv asked again, after waiting for a
“Why do you shout so? You’ll frighten them!” said Borís. “I did
“Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
“Why have you thrown that away?” asked Borís.
“Why? I love you more than ever,” said Princess Mary, “and I will
“Why is it you were never at Annette’s?” the little princess asked
“Why not?” inquired Borís.
why she’s ashamed!”
“Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall see
“Why should you be ashamed?”
why they all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration
“Why ‘What the devil’?” said Borís, picking it up and reading
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
wife, and that it could not be otherwise.
wife... God bless you!...”
wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how all he had
wife, was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
wife, while you...”
will all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not
will certainly happen!” thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
wished to help him but could not.
wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasíli interrupted him in
wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him,
wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kurágin’s wife? Reply: yes or no,”
with a clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling
With a facetious smile on his face, he was telling the ladies about last
with a foretaste of artistic pleasure.
with a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the
“With a message to His Majesty.”
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not
with a sigh he could not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.
with elasticity of movement, faith in his good fortune, and generally in
with flour whitening their carts—on that narrow dam amid the wagons
with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions.
with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.
with him to Dolgorúkov.
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustache
with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the sound
with his right thumb under a button of his uniform, his chest expanded
with it to the marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The marshals,
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
Without answering, Rostóv shook the soldier’s Cross of St. George
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous
without looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply to
without male society, on Anatole’s appearance all the three women of
without reasoning. With an affectation of respect which evidently struck
with papers from Kutúzov to the Tsarévich, he looked in on Borís,
with Telyánin and Bogdánich. That affair was the same thing as this
with the air of an old brigadier.
with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, but the worst of
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military
with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. The
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more
with the old prince.”
with the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers—wounded and
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to
with you. I can’t.”
woman’s privilege.”
woman who may belong to anyone—to you too,” said her glance. And at
women have that dress can make a face pretty.
won’t be in action,” he added as if in apology.
won’t get there till evening.”
words but could not distinguish them. The din of many voices was too
words, he added, “Don’t be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak
words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre
word “waiting.”) “Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your
work, chimes to play, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mère
worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt
worn leather, and an officer’s saber with a sword knot. The Don horse
worse, would have thought that Rostóv was himself to blame since what
worthy of it. This rescript began with the words: “Sergéy Kuzmích,
would be easier to see people coming along it. “Follow me!” said he,
would be killed.
would be something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in
would be to betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to
would have hit Alpátych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively
would have made them.
would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he could
would not be bad as regards the unwritten code,” thought Borís),
would occupy a most brilliant position in society. Don’t you think so?
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to
“Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew
wounded—had left it long ago. All about the field, like heaps of
wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutant
wounds, the loss of family—I fear nothing. And precious and dear
wretched mood. At nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and
wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say: “Till
wrote himself,” said she through her tears.
years before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
“Yes.”
“Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you,” he added.
“Yes, but he will dislike it extremely,” said Bolkónski.
“Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The
“Yes, from Olmütz,” he answered, with a sigh.
“Yes, I’d send them on in front, but no fear, they’re crowding up
“Yes, I feel a kind of oppression,” she said in reply to the
“Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as
“Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow,” he
“Yes... it’s getting on, it will all be settled today.” Anna
“Yes, I was thinking”—for some reason Borís could not help
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, stories!” repeated Rostóv loudly, looking with eyes suddenly
yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought
“Yes, that was fine,” said Rostóv, smiling.
“Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late,” said he, and nodding
“Yes, you have seen him?” said Prince Andrew. “Well, what is
“Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven’s sake... It was only
yet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
yet occupied that region, and the Russians—the uninjured and slightly
yet with a hope for the fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing)
yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing,
you a place in my carriage. I am very glad. All our important business
“You are a little slyboots,” she said.
You are all blubberers and understand nothing.”
“You are still the same dreamer, I see,” remarked Borís, shaking
“You are wounded?” he asked, hardly able to master the trembling of
you, but why should I bother about you? You’d be only too glad, of
“You can give the message to His Majesty,” said Dolgorúkov,
“You don’t mind your honor?” he asked Túshin. “I’ve lost my
you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of
“You have earned the St. George’s standards and will be worthy of
“You haven’t read the letter?” asked Sónya.
“You know Bilíbin—he’s a very clever fellow. He suggested
“You know, Michael Ilariónovich, we are not on the Empress’ Field
“You know, mon cher, your father and I had some accounts to settle, so
“You know they’ve come, Marie?” said the little princess, waddling
“You’ll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy!
“You may go,” he said to Anatole.
“You might have taken some from the covering troops.”
“You must do as you please,” said Prince Bolkónski, bowing to his
young man’s recent loss by the death of Count Bezúkhov (everyone
young. You need advice. Don’t be angry with me for exercising an old
“You picked it up?... I dare say! You’re very smart!” one of them
your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual
your disposal.”
“Your excellency!” Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
“Your excellency,” said Rostóv, “may I ask a favor?”
“Your honor, I thought...”
“Your honor, the generals!” said the sergeant, riding up to Rostóv.
“Your honor, there he is!” cried one of the hussars behind him. And
“Your honor, you’re wanted by the general. He is in the hut here,”
your presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and
yourself in a position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe
you?” said the old prince to Prince Vasíli.
“You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you,”
you that it would be very easy to do so if you haven’t sufficient
“You thought!” shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
you understand, your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not
you’ve had to take,” cried he.
“You will change it, won’t you?” said Lise. And as Princess Mary
“You will find the beautiful Hélène here, whom it is always
you won’t require it. We’ll go into the accounts later.”
“Zum Henker diese Russen!” * muttered a German.
“you and your generals won’t get on against Buonaparte; you’ll
“You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of
you are not aware of the fact...”
“You, Bolkónski, don’t know,” said Bilíbin turning to Prince
you, but we’ll see what will happen. Buonaparte has become a great
You can’t wait a moment! Don’t you see the general wants to pass?”
You can undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course
“You couldn’t see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows!
You’d better listen more carefully!”
you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke Karl gained a
“You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure
you going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two
you—is that that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is
“You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen,” interrupted
“You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!”
“You live in the country and don’t think the life terrible,” he
you’ll be appointed adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when
“You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible,” he
“You need not have said that to me, Father,” said the son with a
young face to look back. A shudder of terror went through him: “No,
“You ought to have been there at seven in the morning.”
you please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father’s father, our
your doing so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my
“You’re always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget
You’re wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of
“Your excellency...”
“Your excellency, here are two trophies,” said Dólokhov, pointing
“Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain
“Your excellency, it’s the officer Dólokhov, who has been reduced
“Your excellency! Let us attack them! I’ll dwive them off.”
“Your excellency,” said he in German, stepping forward and
“Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march.”
your hands.” He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him, and his
your old father...” he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
yourselves. It must be here somewhere,” said Lavrúshka.
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,
your victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can’t be
“You see, my fwiend,” he said, “we sleep when we don’t love. We
“You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
“You spoke to me of inflammable material,” said he, “but you said
“You tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an
youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
“You think I’m an old man and don’t understand the present state
“You told me to remind you of the officer Dólokhov, reduced to the
you to read when I am gone. You will find them useful.”
“You value your own pride and don’t wish to apologize,” continued
“You’ve been in a hurry. That’s bad!”
“you’ve got it at last.”
“You’ve only just missed him,” said the orderly.
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this
“You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer...” continued the colonel in an
you will remember this, your excellency!”
you will see.”
“You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?”
you with my saber!” he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its
“You won’t be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,
“You won’t bear me a grudge, Prokhór Ignátych?” said the
Zherkóv, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about
Zherkóv. They were under orders to advance next day.
Zherkóv touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from
Zherkóv was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the
Znaim.
“‘From all my riding,’ he writes to the Emperor, ‘I have got a
from behind still came the shouts: “Onto the ice, why do you stop? Go
from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look or thought of
from home, at dinners, parties, and balls.
from Pétenka—he took part in it—and it’s all true. When
from the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted the
from the drawing room.
from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.
from this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense and
from understanding—how am I to put it?—I am afraid my way of looking
    * Frühstück: breakfast.
fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of moral
furies and rages at everyone and everything, seizes the letters, opens
furlough after Christmas to return with him to their regiment. His
gasping voice. “Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don’t matter,
gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.
gave zest to his pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time away
Gavríl to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sónya on the sly—he now
general attention, and Anna Pávlovna felt that the novelty she had
general conversation.
gentleman,” said the postmaster, entering the room followed by another
“Gentlemen,” said Dólokhov after he had dealt for some time.
German—I congratulate him! I can’t make out what the commander at
“Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don’t you hear? Go
girls and avoiding their eyes.
girls’ voices came from the adjoining room. The door was opened a
given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the regular army,
giving the messenger a significant look.
glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.
glances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natásha blushed
glancing into the drawing room, where he saw Véra and his mother with
glass.
glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most gracious
go.
“Go and choose Denísov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!” he said.
go and tell Lise.”
God!” And without noticing that he was singing, to strengthen the si
“Go, dear,” said Princess Mary.
“God is merciful....”
“God is merciful, birdie.”
“God is merciful, doctors are never needed,” she said.
God,” Pierre went round the table and saw a large open box filled
God,” said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it
“Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and
“Go!” he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look of
go into that. But consider the position in which you are placing her and
gone, Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down
“Gone to bed,” replied the voice of Demyán the house steward, who
good gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?”
good old days. Denísov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself
“Good!” said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with
good thing really.”
“Go!” the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasíli had to go
“Gracious heavens! The young count!” he cried, recognizing his
grandfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet
“‘Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is
grant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his
grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,
grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone. The old
grave, moment I did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no
grayish color.
greater reasons.”
greatness....”
greatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, and
ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and misty; at
growing excited. “What about your son, your sister, and your
Guards?” asked Napoleon.
guessing Rostóv’s thought.
guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagratión, to
habit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs—“I am afraid I am very far
had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army.
had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had
had been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he listened
had been got ready for him, glancing now and then at the newcomer, who,
had been increased by a half. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit
had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters
had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
had fixed on that number because forty-three was the sum of his and
had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward morning
had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. The
had happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,
had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it
Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realms
had instantly noticed her brother’s condition. But, though she noticed
had killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded.
had no connection with the matter in hand. His haggard face was yellow.
had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is a
had not told all and that there was something in his feelings for the
had prevailed. She drew her brother’s attention to the maid who was
had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. Suddenly he
had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away. It was
had revealed to him. A week after his arrival, the young Polish count,
had sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at
had the ear of the company.
had then said.
“Had there been no Bagratión, it would have been necessary to
hairs painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed him, and
Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the
hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs’
“Hallo, Gwíska—my pipe!” came Vasíli Denísov’s husky voice.
hall, where Denísov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord
handed him, smiled at Dólokhov’s words, and with a sinking heart,
hand he held carefully back, because he wished to support his right
handkerchief, and pipe.
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkónski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
hand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.
hands and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him. He had
hands, he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull—a Masonic
hands that are unclean.” While the Grand Master said these last words
hand with it and knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and
hanged,” said Prince Andrew with a smile. “So I am serving because
happened, he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his
happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune.”—“I regret it very
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though reluctantly,
happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas brought
happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitful
happiness or peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me
happiness possible, and that is just what you want to deprive him of.
happy and smiling. Véra was playing chess with Shinshín in the drawing
hard.... For ages, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor to
“Has anything come from Andrew?” she asked.
has come down to us from the remotest ages, even from the first man—a
has his stand, and there’s Zakhár himself and still the same horse!
has proposed to Sónya!”
hastening her steps. “You young ladies should not know anything about
hast thou denied?” he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and
have certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me;
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dólokhov
Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful
have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not.
have obliged me to give this refusal.”
Have received another letter about the Preussisch-Eylau battle
have seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came
“Have some brought from the reserve,” said Napoleon, and having gone
have the carriage to drive to town:
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wanted
have to go in and ask the princesses; and from there go on to the
have virtuous aims,” said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy
   Have we not Bagratión?
Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its
Having given several more orders, he was about to go to his “little
Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet
having said this laughed. Everyone turned toward him.
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in
head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket. He
head cook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and
he added: “But beware, dear brother, that these gloves do not deck
headquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small
head (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hair lay round
health?”
health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!” he roared, “Hurrah!” and
health was drunk, Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his
heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of
heard before, others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked, while
heard curses on Bonaparte, “the enemy of mankind.” Militiamen and
heard the quick rustle of the countess’ dress. She came up to them.
heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not only
hearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds of
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvítski and the
hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in her
heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.
“He asked you, and Vasíli Dmítrich * is also going.”
He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few more seconds
   He brings foemen to their knees,... etc.
he can’t help plowing and mowing; if he didn’t, he would go to the
he chanced to meet Dólokhov’s handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt
He checked himself, fearing to seem naïve, yet he felt an irresistible
he clutched at his head. “Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmítri!
He continued to pace the room, looking gloomily at Denísov and the
he described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, when with other
He did not reply.
he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spoke
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But
“He exists, but to understand Him is hard,” the Mason began again,
he felt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he looked sideways
he felt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that these
He filled the girls’ albums with verses and music, and having at last
He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tears
he, going to the door and looking into the nursery.
He had evidently not slept that night. He looked about distractedly and
he had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a white leather
he had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her. When they
he had left Petersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his
he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all
“He has perspired,” said Prince Andrew.
He hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denísov’s
He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago, and he
He implored Rostóv to go on and prepare her.
He involuntarily remembered how Dólokhov, who had fully recovered his
“He is a nervous, bilious subject,” said Larrey, “and will not
“He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life,” said the
He jumped up at the sound of her light step.
“He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can’t want my
he. “Laughing at us old fellows!”
he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his big
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that
held it below her waist.
held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it) and drew his
He leaned his whole massive body across the table.
Hélène.”
Hélène raised her voice and became more and more excited, “A man
Hélène. “Separate! That’s a thing to frighten me with!”
Hélène’s face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. His
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices
he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
“Help comes from God alone,” he said, “but such measure of help as
helplessly on the sofa.
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing
he made himself when going into battle, and he was more amiable to the
he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he
he marked the figures in his clear, bold hand.
he meant to do, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly
he might be, did not expect. He was so used to submitting to Prince
“He must first receive the trowel,” whispered one of the brothers.
He must think that I, too, am afraid of him—and in fact I am afraid of
he needs money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a
he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
He paused a little while.
He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself.
He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa by way
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered
her.
her already,” he said, evidently trying to entertain a visitor with
her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst
her because you must, and that wouldn’t do at all.”
he reeled and sank on the snow.
“Here he is... our own... Kólya, * dear fellow... How he has
here I’ve brought the prince’s wedding candles to light before his
He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.
He remembered the expression Dólokhov’s face assumed in his moments
here on Friday.”
here, run away, bury myself somewhere?” passed through his mind. But
“Here’s to the health of lovely women, Peterkin—and their
her eyes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of her
her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave her a
Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remained
her face, and then immediately he saw beside her Dólokhov’s handsome,
her foot into the other. Sónya, when he came in, was twirling round and
Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested
her. How often when considering her character I have told myself that
her in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of
her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy mouth with its
her little nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed
her mother, quite excited.
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear,
her—please don’t! It is too painful for her!”
her, Rostóv thought, but just now there were so many other pleasures
her seducer when she loved him?” he thought. “God could not have put
herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with
her sufferings or with their relief. The pangs began again and Mary
her sympathy for Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile
her—thou or you?”
he said. “Perhaps you are right for yourself,” he added after
“He’s arrived!”
he shrugged his shoulders and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if
hesitating voice. “I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But
hesitation and uncertainty among his conductors. He heard those around
He still had all the letters in his hand. Opening them mechanically he
He stopped and remained silent for a long time.
he stopped short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot
he sung a second, a third below the high note. “Ah, God! How fine! Did
“He’s very young to come to meddle with us.”
he thought, stopping for a moment with a sinking heart, and then
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the
He tried to say more, but faltered.
he unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped his
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not hot.
He was joyfully planning this new life, when Prince Vasíli suddenly
He was pleased at the gratitude he received, but felt abashed at
He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with his sparkling
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did not
he was told that he would now see the lesser light. The bandage was
he was to wear at the meetings, and finally of the third, a pair of
he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas à Kempis, whose
He went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to give
he will hit me in the head, or elbow, or knee. Can’t I go away from
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,
he would have been mentioned among the officers found on the field of
he would have done at that moment had Hélène not fled from the room.
he would rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath,
highly honored guest, took possession of him as it were, without waiting
him.
him.
him.
him and he was at once blindfolded again.
him, and only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly
him; but most of all, he felt joyful that the moment had come when he
him, carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over
him disputing in whispers and one of them insisting that he should be
him do what he pleases,’ she used to say of me. One day I asked her if
him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to
him?” he asked.
him, he does not know Russian.”
him he is a fool, that’s all!”
him,” he thought, and again he felt something terrible and monstrous
him into the sitting room, where they began talking. They hardly gave
him my whole staff and all that belongs to it, advising him if there is
him, or what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing
himself.
himself.
himself, and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant
himself in the palace at Potsdam.
himself to the count, who was looking inquiringly at him.
him several questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in
him so when I see him!”
him surrounded by children whom, by the count’s generosity, he was
him to come. There were other guests and the countess talked little to
him to die. Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is.
him up and lent him money. Pierre recalled how Hélène had smilingly
him what consolation I can.”
him with her usual smile.
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: “Le Roi de Prusse...” and
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.
his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, the
his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland.
his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in
his breast. Among them stood a man whose white shirt was stained with
his company? If you were cleverer and more agreeable, I should prefer
his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectful
his easy life in Moscow, entered the room.
His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and the
his example, and the loud shouting continued for a long time. When the
his eyes at the sight.
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.
His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless
his fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered
his father and his fatherland. To the great regret of myself and of the
his father’s peculiarities, and partly because he needed solitude,
his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father,
his future depended—whether he would follow the same old road, or that
His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid of dropping
his hand and at the head of a regiment—he fell as a hero, worthy of
his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the
His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, though
his husbandry.
his legs almost gave way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. He
his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly.
his lips without uttering a sound. He wished to say, “Yes, a vile,
his mouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre.
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But still, as
his plate, and proposed a toast, “To the health of the hero of our
his present state.
his relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were
his saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dólokhov lowered his head to
His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by
his side had been attempting a reconciliation), and he also went up to
his son by both hands, he cried, “Now I’ve got you, so take the
his time. But he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has too
his time there.
his verses, bowed to Bagratión. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner
his voice. “She is living in Moscow and you are here. Remember,
his wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, he
his whole soul what the stranger said. Whether he accepted the wise
his wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning, which
his wife’s room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen
“Hm... Hm...!” growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her, and
hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and sat
hollows and snow-covered pools of water.
home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his
home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square,
home,” said the valet.
honorable, of Bezúkhov? And Fédya, with his noble spirit, loved him
honor? Knowing him to be an only son, to challenge him and shoot so
honor to choose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do to get
honor, was terrible.
hoped. She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting news
hoped to lead he still lived the old life, only in new surroundings.
hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. In regard to which I humbly
hospitality, did the honors to the prince.
hospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what’s
household, a common anxiety, a softening of the heart, and a
house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and
house, now and then opening her door when someone passed and watching
houses from his door. It seemed to him the horses were not moving at
house was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced
“How about the horses?” he asked, without looking at Pierre.
how can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity,
“How dare you take it?” he shouted.
How d’ye do, old fellow?” he said, turning to an old man who was
“How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good,”
“However, this is not at all interesting. Let us have dinner, and then
How have you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receiving
how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felt that he was
“How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,
how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into his
“How strange it is,” said Véra, selecting a moment when all were
“How sweet she is—she will be a weal beauty!” said Denísov.
how the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to
how to behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment of
hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the same
human skull with its cavities and teeth. After reading the first words
humility.
hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,
hundred rubles was left of that money, so that this seven of hearts
hurriedly: “I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you
husband of a beauty, and in a word—an old woman; and secondly because
I, above all, who am to blame for everything. Help me, teach me, and
I alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
“I am.”
I am.”
“I am afraid,” said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the
“I am ready for everything,” said Pierre.
“I am so glad you’ve come!” said Natásha, without answering him.
“‘I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the
“I begin ab ovo. ‘The enemy of the human race,’ as you know,
“I bestow it with pleasure,” said Napoleon. “And who is that young
“I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in the
“I called once or twice at your house,” said Rostóv, reddening.
“I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?” he said.
“I can’t tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardly
ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered
ice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond.
“I commanded a squadron,” replied Repnín.
idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your
idleness, but would grow fat and die. The third thing—what else was
idle, vicious life!” but dared not break the silence.
I doing? Aren’t they laughing at me? Shan’t I be ashamed to remember
“I do not understand,” said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubts
I do not yet know. There will be time enough to think about love when I
“I don’t understand,” he said, “how it is that the mind of man
I envy him, but you want to make him what I am, without giving him my
“I expected help from you and I get none, none from you either!”
“I expect so.”
if about to tell a good story he put down the cards, leaned back in his
“If He were not,” he said quietly, “you and I would not be
“If I have time,” answered Nicholas. “But I promised the
if in search of something. Before dinner the old prince, of whom she was
“If it is true that Monsieur Denísov has made you a proposal, tell
if she had not meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying
if you are in love, marry him!” said the countess, with a laugh of
“If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I...”
“If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation,” said the Rhetor
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood.” (Pierre nodded
“If you please, your excellency, Pétrusha has brought some papers,”
“If you won’t answer, I’ll tell you...” Hélène went on. “You
“I have already refused,” she said hurriedly.
“I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count,” he
I have done that though badly and to a small extent; but I have done
“I have heard of you, my dear sir,” continued the stranger, “and
“I have met loving, noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met
“I have no money with me,” he said.
“I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but for
“I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezúkhov, if I am not
“I... hope... for guidance... help... in regeneration,” said Pierre,
“I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who
“I?... I’m going to Petersburg,” answered Pierre, in a childlike,
I know for certain that you won’t marry her.”
“I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a
“I know people consider me a bad man!” he said. “Let them! I
“I know your outlook,” said the Mason, “and the view of life you
I’ll just finish dealing, and then Ilyúshka will come with his
“I’ll kill you!” he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table
“I’ll sing for you a whole evening,” said Natásha.
“I’ll tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Prince Andrew, who
“I’ll trust you.”
illumined, and plunge him into the depths of unknown and undefined
I love so that I would give my life for them, and the others I’d
    * I love you.
“I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you
Ilyá has sent you to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.’ We
Ilyúshka, the one who danced at Count Orlóv’s, you remember, in a
imagination a new plan of life. On the previous evening at the Lodge, he
imagine...”
imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the three
“I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this
I’m alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I
“I’m certain of it; you’ll see.”
immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of
“I’m not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous
“‘I most ardently desire,’ writes the King of Prussia to
impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor
impatient the nearer they got to Moscow.
imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet.
impetus, and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that
implied that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was
importance, he returned again, called back the cook and the club
important and unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all
impossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double or
impressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their own
“I must also inform you,” said the Rhetor, “that our Order
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief
in a cheerful voice:
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed
in all sincerity—not as a future Mason but as an honest man: have you
in any case. He has forwarded me a letter from Borís. Thank God, Borís
in a shovel—the guests who had been scattered about in different rooms
inattentive, but you had talent—oh yes, you had talent!”
inclination—practical business.
income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,
incomparably higher than a general, and according to which what was
in comparison with eternity?”
incomprehensible—the death of one she loved.
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all
in conversation—Count Rostopchín, Prince Yúri Dolgorúkov, Valúev,
incredible, unheard-of, and impossible event of a Russian defeat,
indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not
indignantly. “I come to ask you what to do, and you call it
“I never go back on my word,” he said. “Besides, Sónya is so
inevitable pain showed itself.
infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard
influence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.
“Inform the prince that labor has begun,” said Mary Bogdánovna,
in Great Russia, which formed the larger part of his property, and left
in hand.
in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:
in it by spring.
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened to make
in Kishenëv with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a
in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and
in Mary Bogdánovna’s trembling white hands.
in my opinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have
in our house, aren’t they?”
in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and His
“In our temples we recognize no other distinctions,” read the Grand
in pure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and
in Rostóv’s soul! And this something was apart from everything else
insane—unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the serfs—made
“In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude,
insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet, and
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. From
in spite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trust
in spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were
instructing in reading, writing, and religion. On all his estates Pierre
instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his
insufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.
intended for you too. Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most
intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders
intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible, and
intention to part from her forever.
interesting and entertaining. After the field marshal’s departure
interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkónski, Prince Andrew, and
“In that case...” began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.
“In that case we can go,” said Willarski. “My carriage is at your
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war with
In the autumn the Rostóvs returned to Moscow. Early in the winter
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to
in the house on the Povarskáya rose before him with such vividness,
in their own play.
in their power.
in the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,
“In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death,” the
In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg. On the way he
in the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform. He made friends with
In the third circle, Narýshkin was speaking of the meeting of the
in the world and above everything in the world. “What were losses, and
intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of
intimately regretted that he had died so young, leaving a pregnant wife
into her heart an impulse that was against His will. My wife—as she
into his room one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in
“In token of obedience, I ask you to undress.”
into the water. He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.
into the water, or when he challenged a man to a duel without any
invent him,” said the wit Shinshín, parodying the words of Voltaire.
involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.
in war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We have
Iogel’s were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers
“I ought to tell you that I do not believe... do not believe in
“I promised to pay tomorrow,” said Nicholas.
I really take it? How fortunate!” he thought.
irreparable. There was no insult on either side. Allow me to
irresistibly attractive to Pierre.
“I said from the first,” declared Anna Pávlovna referring to
is a very good thing, but not for you—I don’t suppose you ever had
“I say, Rostóv,” said Dólokhov clearly, smiling and looking
is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. He
is Denísov!”
“Is everything quite all right?”
is for myself.”
“I should never dare to say that I know the truth,” said the Mason,
“I should not be doing my duty, Count,” he said in timid tones,
is now on the staff.”
isn’t it logical?
“Is Papa at home?” he asked.
is the baby born?”
is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruit
is the only thing left me—not singing!” his thoughts ran on. “Go
“Is this good or bad?” Pierre asked himself. “It is good for me,
“Is this your saber?” asked Pétya. “Or is it yours?” he said,
“Is this your saber?” he shouted.
it.”
it.
it.
it and wished to hear it again. In her voice there was a virginal
it appears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle.
it. At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over
“It can’t be helped! It happens to everyone!” said the son, with
it dashed, some forward and some back, drowning one another.
I think there were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out
it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I
“It is all, all her fault,” he said to himself; “but what of that?
“It is of great importance to me,” she said, turning with a smile
“It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I...” she began, but
it on his coat and supported himself with it. His frowning face was
it on something, and told him to hold a pair of compasses to his left
it on the field at Schön Grabern. Young Rostóv’s ecstatic voice
it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor
“It’s all the same to me,” he said. “I only want to see whether
“It’s all up! I’m lost!” thought he. “Now a bullet through my
“It’s a long time since we met,” he said. “Thanks for coming.
“It’s Andrew!” thought Princess Mary. “No it can’t be, that
its broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezúkhov. The
It seemed as if from some words Borís had spoken that evening about the
it seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoiling
it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servant
it seemed to Pierre that he grew embarrassed. Pierre himself grew still
itself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that
it, she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from
“It’s impossible,” replied another.
It’s true he has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that?
its upper lip covered with tiny black hair.
its use, he does not believe in the master who made it. To know Him is
its usual semblance of a smile.
it turns out that ‘the enemy of the human race’ pays no heed to
it turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more,
It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irresistible
it was long before their conversation could settle on anything. They
It was long since Rostóv had felt such enjoyment from music as he
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding
it was not so, that I had no right to do it. And so it turns out.”
It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its
It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching the boy
it with you?...”
It would be different if you grudged losing a laborer—that’s how I
“It would be good,” thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his
it you talked about?” and Prince Andrew crooked a third finger. “Ah,
Ivánovich Kutúzov:
“I’ve come to sit with you a bit, Másha,” said the nurse, “and
“I was coming to tell you so.”
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that
“I was very much surprised when I heard of it,” said Prince Andrew.
“I? What have I...?” stammered Pierre.
jest.
joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
joys and sorrows of this world—overflowed the great grief within her.
Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from him
“Just as I may suppose you to be deluded,” said Pierre, with a faint
just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him, he would ask in a
Just before dinner, Count Ilyá Rostóv presented his son to Bagratión,
just returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man
Kámenski, visited the English Club, and was on intimate terms with a
keen interest in the whole affair. You know she is very gracious to
kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.
Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs, taking with
killed anyone, or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible
Killed them, yes!” said he, frowning angrily and turning away from
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the firm
Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness with thy
kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more kissing,
King of Prussia and others: ‘So much the worse for you. Tu l’as
King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All
kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she replied
kissed her forehead.
kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not there, he noticed
kisses. Her looks asked him to forgive her for having dared, by
kissing her hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without
knew that. What will be the result? That I shall be the laughingstock of
knight. “I’m even weady to dance the pas de châle.”
knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open
know!”
know all about it and understand it all,” he said. “You behaved as
know, and know for certain, that the enjoyment of doing this good is the
know God and hate your life. There is nothing strange in that, my dear
knowing how. First he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now
Knowing that Denísov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly
know it is all over, and forever.”
know myself again.”
known). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew,
   Knows by experience, now, Bagratión,
Kórchevo—a certain Khandrikóv—is up to; till now the additional
Kronq,—chargé d’affaires from Copenhagen—a profound intellect,”
Kurágins’. All maintained a solemn silence, listening to the words
Kutúzov.
Kutúzov no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers,
Kutúzov writes...” and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to
labor but should die of it in a week, so he could not stand my physical
labor is as essential to him, as much a condition of his existence, as
labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did not know
ladies and gentlemen than Rostóv had ever expected to see him.
ladies and, leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot, told
ladies—” He turned with the same request to Denísov who was also a
large dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old card
large estate, Boguchárovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills.
large leather sofa from Prince Andrew’s study into the bedroom. On
largest landowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre’s greatest
Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence.
last campaign, Prince Peter Ivánovich Bagratión!” and again his blue
last few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther
last time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel
“Late! It’s nearly ten o’clock,” answered Natásha’s voice.
later on. Oh, how glad I am to have you!”
latest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the
latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,
lathe and, as usual, did not look round at her.
laughed.
laughed at every word he said or that she said herself, not because what
laughing. “Dear, dear!...”
lay across the bed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smacking
leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre
leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
learned that Dólokhov the brawler, Dólokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
learn from Suvórov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a
“Leave it,” said Dólokhov, though he did not seem to be even
leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She saw him tender
leave of Rostóv in the club porch.
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
led along a certain carpet. After that they took his right hand, placed
Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice
left breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers
“Le Roi de Prusse?” Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing,
less a prey to evil and death?—death which ends all and must come
less, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every day. Princess Mary
letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had
letters to Princess Mary’s apartments, but did not find him there. He
life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two—morality and the
“Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do
life: remorse and illness. The only good is the absence of those evils.
life together were stripped, so that the screw could not get in or out,
life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
lifted in childlike happiness.
likely the doctor.”
like method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies
like strangers.”
Lise. I will follow.”
listened to his regular breathing. The dark shadow was Princess Mary,
listened to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that his
listening to the gypsies and other singers.
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sónya of late, something
little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing at his
little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother’s neck, but
little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest
little, I mean a good deal, a great deal—forty three thousand.”
little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves. Natásha
little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of
little Natásha as grown up.
lived for glory.—And after all what is glory? The same love of others,
lived for others, and not almost, but quite, ruined my life. And I have
living with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not survive it.
living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had
locks of gray hair.
Lodge—were so strong that he could not resist them. Again whole days,
Lodge. Willarski coughed, he was answered by the Masonic knock with
longed. Sónya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially at
longed to kiss his father’s hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness,
longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helpless
looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved
looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she
looking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.
looking and held out his hand to her. She pressed it.
looking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denísov was refusing
looking at Natásha.
looking at Rostóv, “you’ll win it back all the sooner. I lose to
looking at the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm.
looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave
looking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves
looking pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord,
looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, having let
look. Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first
“Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and ask
lost. Dólokhov “killed,” that is, beat, ten cards of Rostóv’s
lost more than he could pay.
“Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and a
love again, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,
love for Natásha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see
love her.
love her, for that would be impossible.
love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of
love of death. He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled
lovers!” he added.
love you.”
love you, and I think I love you more than anyone else....”
loving her; in deceiving yourself and her.” And he vividly recalled
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse’s wrinkled face (every line of which
luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that
Madame de Souza. He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous
made and highly valued. The old count came up to them and pressed
“Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!” she exclaimed.
made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre’s story of what he
“Made what?”
maid.
mainly because Denísov so delighted in her singing. She no longer sang
Majesty,” said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were
mallets and swords. As he was being led up to some object he noticed a
mallets, the doors opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was still
“Mamma, are you cross? Don’t be cross, dear! Is it my fault?”
“Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me...”
man, and that in the duel with Bezúkhov, Pierre was right and Dólokhov
man beside you?”
man; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a good
man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used
man, with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite
many young men to his parents’ house. Véra was a handsome girl
marked the change? I sat all the time in this same place at this table,
marriage—when the marriageable daughters and their mothers had nothing
married,” answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.
marry anyone, but will be a dancer. Only don’t tell anyone.”
martyr’s death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being
“Mary Bogdánovna, I think it’s beginning!” said Princess Mary
Mary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,
Mary, I am going to love him very much,” said Lise, looking with
Mary! Say...” And the little princess began to cry capriciously like
“Mary,” she said, moving away from the embroidery frame and lying
Mary spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother’s place to
Mason.
Masonic statutes, “be kindly and courteous,” recurred to him. He
Master, “but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any
master, would touch and delude him.
match in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his
mathematics from her father, and when the old prince was at home went
matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for
may not have seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those
may perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom
mazuwka is this? But she does dance splendidly.”
meaning for anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life;
means. Then you say, ‘lighten his toil.’ But as I see it, physical
meant for him not only the loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the
meant to double the three thousand just put down to his score, when
Meanwhile, Pétya, having found and seized the sabers in the outer room,
measures—the removal of injunctions, petitions, permits, and so
meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not
me. ‘Everyone fears a bear,’ he says, ‘but when you see one your
me in choosing me for your second, if at this grave, this very
me in the eyes of society, and even of the court,” he added, lowering
me, just because I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriended him,
members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look
memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried not
me... myself most of all. Then I don’t eat, don’t wash... and how is
men and provisions have not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and
men’s will.
mental activity is to you or me. You can’t help thinking. I go to bed
mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.
mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,
mention her!” he exclaimed fiercely.
men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady on one
men with broad, self-confident faces, fat fingers, and resolute gestures
met him at the first door and, expressing their delight at seeing such a
met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift her face, but
midwife.
might deprive him of all this happiness, newly appreciated and newly
might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so
Mikháylovna entered the hall. Though she came upon the count in his
military men, bore that expression of condescending respect for their
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
mind to ask him a question about the roads, the traveler had closed his
minute later with another committeeman, carrying a large silver salver
minutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in
mischief-makers don’t meddle even a German beats Buonaparte. He is
misery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say you do not
misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with a sinking heart the
misfortune? And when did it begin? Such a little while ago I came to
misleading you.”
“Missed!” shouted Dólokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards
mistaken,” said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.
misunderstanding. I expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her
mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water. The maid brought
modeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay,” suggesting
moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed
moment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched every
moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists,
“Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!” she heard as she left the room.
monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to his
more.
more and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook
more confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, began
more honorable to admit one’s mistake than to let matters become
more important nearer to the honored guest, as naturally as water flows
more outcries, and tears of joy. He could not distinguish which was
mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not cease
Moscovites who took their opinions from others—Ilyá Rostóv among
Moscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the
Moscow’s hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city
Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The night after the
Moscow. The remembrance of the Rostóvs’ house and of his childish
Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanterns
most of her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not
most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
mother by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would be to
movement of Dólokhov’s hands. Those broad, reddish hands, with hairy
movement, word, or look of his, never taking their blissfully adoring
move on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held under
Moving the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostóv sat down by his
“Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won’t change
much interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that he
much, my dear sir.”
mustache. “I want to know what you men are like. Are you the same as
“My cousin has nothing to do with this and it’s not necessary to
“My darling!” he said—a word he had never used to her before.
“My dear count, you were one of my best pupils—you must dance,”
“My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you
“My dear,” he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind
“My dear, really... it’s better not to wake him... he’s asleep,”
“My dear,” said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside
my dear sir,” he added, seeing that his servant had entered... “and
my empty portmanteau and my dressing gown. The Emperor proposes to give
“My God, I’m a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through my brain
“My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother,” and
“My passion! I have had so many,” replied Pierre.
my riding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed on the
myself and ruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least
myself and you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise
myself not long ago, in Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I
mystery is of such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be
mystery on which perhaps the fate of mankind depends. But since this
naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself be
Napoleon’s eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders were
Narýshkin, Uvárov, Dolgorúkov, Apráksin, Valúev, to the committee,
“Nataly,” he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, “decide my
Natásha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face
Natásha, and Sónya, and will certainly never touch a card again.” At
Natásha. But he was not as much at ease with Sónya and Dólokhov as
Natásha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began
Natásha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. She
Natásha flared up. “I don’t want to marry anyone. And I’ll tell
Natásha. Nicholas understood that something must have happened between
Natásha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real
Natásha’s intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then
Natásha’s prediction proved true. Dólokhov, who did not usually care
Natásha suddenly flushed.
Natásha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing seriously,
Natásha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose,
Natásha to sing.
Natásha, who was exceptionally graceful, was first, even danced the pas
natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner. On
near him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the
near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and
necessary for the position. Then there’s this house, which must be
necessity of going back on his word. With a sinking heart he watched
neck. On his right sat the Italian abbé whom Pierre had met at
needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, or
need, even the inevitability, of entering into conversation with this
need some money.”
neighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss. Forgive thy
neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.)
neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married, my
neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezúkhov.
Nesvítski closed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report
Nesvítski. Count Ilyá Rostóv with the other members of the committee
Nesvítski’s and Dólokhov’s sabers, which were stuck into the
Nesvítski stopped him and took him home.
Nesvítski was there as an old member of the club. Pierre, who at his
never bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous.
Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous
new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last
new friend’s influence.
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
new mustache. “Now then, get on,” he shouted to the driver. “Do
new pack of cards said: “Bank, gentlemen!”
new path so attractively shown him by the Masons, on which he firmly
news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other
news—if it’s not false. Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete
Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvítski drove to the
Next day Rostóv saw Denísov off. He did not wish to stay another
Next day, the third of March, soon after one o’clock, two hundred and
Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slept
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pierre
next note, the next phrase, and everything in the world was divided into
“Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Borís?”
nice... but it won’t do...not that... but as a friend, I shall always
    * Nicholas.
Nicholas and Denísov were walking up and down, looking with kindly
Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.
“Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!” said Natásha’s voice.
“Nicholas, don’t tell me that!” she said.
“Nicholas! Get up!” Natásha’s voice was again heard at the door.
“Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!” called the old countess
Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
Nicholas Rostóv, with Denísov and his new acquaintance, Dólokhov, sat
Nicholas straight in the eyes, “you know the saying, ‘Lucky in love,
Nicholas tried to say “Yes,” but could not: and he nearly burst into
Nicholas turned away from her. Natásha too, with her quick instinct,
Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her
“Nicholas, will you come to Iogel’s? Please do!” said Natásha.
night. But now, in the solitude of the journey, they seized him with
night he had not the slightest doubt, and the guiltlessness of
Nikólenka; by his relations as a charming, attractive, and polite young
“Nikólenka, what is the matter?” Sónya’s eyes fixed on him
“No.”
“No apologies, none whatever,” said Dólokhov to Denísov (who on
“No, but don’t you think it’s nice?” she kept repeating.
“No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in
“No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to say
“No, but listen,” she said, “now you are quite a man, aren’t
“No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?”
“No, call her you, please! I’ll tell you all about it some other
“No. Give me the book,” said the stranger.
“No, he’s not a fool!” replied Natásha indignantly and seriously.
“No, I can’t agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and
“No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it,” said Pierre,
“No, I hate my life,” Pierre muttered, wincing.
“No, I meant to ask...” Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted
“No, I mustn’t. I am so sorry for him! He’s so nice.”
“No, it’s only indigestion?... Say it’s only indigestion, say so,
“No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. It’s all very
no longer, as it should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to
“No, Mamma, but I’m so sorry for him. I don’t know how I’m to
“No, Mamma, I’m not in love with him, I suppose I’m not in love
“No matter at all, my dear count,” she said, meekly closing her
“No matter, Princess, don’t be alarmed,” said Mary Bogdánovna.
“No, my dear fellow, I’ll be a wallflower,” said Denísov.
“No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you,” said
“No, no!” cried Natásha, “she and I have already talked it over.
“No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you’ll listen
‘nonsense!’”
nonsense... but this is real.... Now then, Natásha, now then, dearest!
nonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does it
nonsense,” he thought. “The slur on my name and honor—that’s all
“Nonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact,” said Natásha
“No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying stone on stone
No one slept.
“No-o-o!” muttered Dólokhov through his teeth, “no, it’s not
“No, Papa is not back yet,” said Sónya.
“No, pardon me, I won’t go now till the child is better,” thought
nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hear
not a distinction,” said the diplomatist—“a gift, rather.”
not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was:
not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls’ room.
not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst of
not breathe. He knew that he must do something to put an end to this
“No, tell them to harness.”
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the
“Nothing,” answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiant
nothing, but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the
nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some
“Nothing... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew,” she said, wiping
nothing to be happy about!” thought he.
nothing to him.... “I should perhaps have done the same thing in his
noticeable one at the dinner. Rostóv looked inimically at Pierre,
no time for reflection, as in Petersburg. Instead of the new life he had
not know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in
not moving a muscle.
“No, to kill a man is bad—wrong.”
not only without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was
not realize that he had come. His coming had nothing to do with
not resume your former way of life. And now I wish you a good journey,
“Not seen Duport—the famous dancer? Well then, you won’t
not see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness
not to have to repent is not enough. I lived like that, I lived for
not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sitting
not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life out
not wish it. In a word, I make no promise. And I beg you to consider
now.”
“Now, dear boy,” said Prince Vasíli playfully, “say ‘yes,’
now gradually opening before me.” But five of the other virtues which
“No! What is there to talk about?” said Pierre. “It’s all the
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
“Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order,” he said,
“Now?” repeated Natásha, and a happy smile lit up her face. “Have
“Now, Sónya!” she said, going to the very middle of the room, where
Now then, darling! How will she take that si? She’s taken it! Thank
“Now then, Váska,” said Nicholas.
now there’s this recruiting.”
now the smile of the little princess—influenced by the general mood
“Now thou hast seen the lesser light,” uttered a voice. Then the
now to look at Dólokhov, who was sitting opposite him. Every time
now we shall get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him
“Now you don’t know that at all!” said Nicholas. “But I must
“No, you know it’s too soon for news. But my father is anxious and I
nurse and nurse Sávishna in the late princess’ rooms and Princess
nurse, Praskóvya Sávishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the
Nurse Sávishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcely
obedience—which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. (He now
obeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. “Where am I? What am
objects mentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improving mankind,
obligingly took the dish from Bagratión (or he would, it seemed, have
occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him
of all. This gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom
of Alms” went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked
of, and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewell supper
of a sin he could neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. The
of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreign
of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable,
of believing in the possibility of attaining perfection, and in the
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
of contempt. “And believe me, if I still value my life it is
of cruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them
of delighted amazement.
of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be
of dread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lightly begun
of each.
of eternal peace and blessedness?” she thought.
of exasperation. “Don’t you hear it’s His Majesty the Emperor’s
off—and this is what comes of it!” said Prince Andrew in an
off at every moment. They waited and listened.
off his eyes and glanced around him. The room was in black darkness,
officer in the white uniform of the Horse Guards.
of hearts. On the previous Sunday the old count had given his son
of hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor. He
of his appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and
of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep
of his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her.
of his return.
of his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. “I
of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from
of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant
of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer the
of love which pervaded the Rostóv household that winter and, now after
of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his
of now as the “Seeker,” now as the “Sufferer,” and now as the
of Peter and Paul, his patron saints. In another place the women with
of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I
of Prussia, in order to draw Borís into the conversation.
of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubt
of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You have
of sons and brothers.
of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led the mazurka
of the club, beset the new arrivals. Count Ilyá, again thrusting his
of the club from the day it was founded. To him the club entrusted the
of the general sorrow.
of the Gospel: “In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with
of the intellectual essence of Petersburg,” as she herself put it.
of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdánovna was a midwife from the
of the nineteenth March, and her downy little lip rose from old habit,
of the President, who held a mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was
of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him a
of these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhöwden pursues
of the sleigh.
of the statutes and these remained in his mind.
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
of the war and without leaders. The Moscovites felt that something was
of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necessity of
of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and
of twenty; Sónya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening
of your misfortune.” He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to
“Oh, Denísov is quite different,” replied Nicholas, implying that
“Oh, how delightful it is!” she kept saying, running up to Sónya.
“Oh, how nice, how splendid!” she said to everything.
Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was finest
“Oh, hush, please!” said another.
“Oh, it’s nothing. I only wished to say...” (he wanted to repeat
“Oh, it’s terrible to feel oneself so in this man’s power,”
“Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting things
“Oh, my God! thank God!” said Princess Mary. “I must go and meet
“Oh no, let me off, Countess,” Denísov replied.
“Oh, no, no!” And besides the pallor and the physical suffering
“Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make your
“Oh no!” said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. “You were only
“Oh, nothing,” said he, as if weary of being continually asked the
“Oh, nurse, I’m so glad!”
“Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!” said Pierre. “I don’t
Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!” she said.
“Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!” said Denísov, and
“Oh, those Moscow gossips!” said Dólokhov, and he took up the cards
“Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible,
“Oh, what nonsense!” cried Natásha, laughing. “I don’t think
“Oh yes,” assented Princess Mary, “perhaps that’s it. I’ll go.
“Oh, yes, I quite understand,” answered Rostóv, who was under his
“Oh yes, it is horribly stupid,” said Pierre.
“Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot,” said he.
“Oh, yes!” said Pierre, with a forced smile. “I am very grateful
old man too came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly
Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokófy, the footman, who was
old prince had forbidden it, appeared on the threshold with a shawl
old prince understood from this official report that our army had been
on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with
on around him. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to
once she has said...”
once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,
once was—did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has been
one another, beginning to see one another through the mist. They had the
one another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand
one day’s ration of bread remains, and in some regiments none at all,
one foot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flew round the room
one I’d give my life for her! But those!...” and he made a gesture
one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge
“One more question, Count,” he said, “which I beg you to answer
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the
One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted.
One. “Oh, this senseless life of ours!” thought Nicholas. “All
“One should make up to the husbands of pretty women,” said Denísov.
one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third
“One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man,” said
“O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!” he shouted angrily and stepped aside.
one would have expected of him.
On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.
on! Go on!” And cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The soldiers
on hearing the news was one of anger with Sónya.... He tried to say,
on her face.
on her priority) “that that senseless young man was spoiled by the
on her toes any longer. “So that’s what I’m up to! I’ll never
on him without changing their expression. “I love you all and have
On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostóv was welcomed
on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin
on!” innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck
only a small lamp was burning inside something white. Pierre went nearer
only because I still hope to meet such a divine creature, who will
only betrayed us three times in three years. We take up their cause, but
only bivouacking here and have just come to look round. I am going back
only heard Dólokhov’s hurried steps, and his figure came in view
only help a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have my own orchestra,
only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar’s jacket. Denísov,
only Sónya, Nicholas, and Natásha, but even the old countess,
only sure happiness in life.”
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival,
on—that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:
On that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club were filled
“On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails
on the cot.
on the field.
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had
on the little princess’ face, an expression of childish fear of
On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his
on. The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his
on the snow.
on the table, again bound his eyes.
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he had
“On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great pleasure.”
on what he thought right. The steward promised to do all in his power to
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written “800 rubles” in
opened eyes. “What has happened to her? How she is singing today!”
opened the bedroom door.
open it. Someone was holding it shut.
operations according to him were connected with such complicated
opposite Pierre and seemed very gay. Rostóv was talking merrily to his
or appreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybody
“Or are you afraid to play with me?” Dólokhov now asked as if
ordeal was about to begin.
Orders, and the Star of St. George on his left breast. Evidently just
orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktíst, the club’s
ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince’s
or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops. So the first
other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the
others, only now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I
other virtues—love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.
our fine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the
our members as much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and
our officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another
our Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going to
our present, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like
ourselves.”
ourselves, were growing up and dying with no idea of God and truth
our thoughts to the second, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at
out accidently.”
out of it. They could not understand that I have not the necessary
outright.
outside his uniform.
out. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a
out there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasíli Ignátovich...
over.” And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the
overflow with sick, and famine is everywhere. Twice the marauders even
over his shoulder, as when Rostóv had seen him on the eve of the battle
over. It will be a tremendous banquet.”
over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries
over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand
owed him money! What baseness! What meanness! I know you understand
own about the facts he was recounting. For some time he engrossed the
painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sing
palace in a manner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances
Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.
pallid and quivered.
“Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. I
“Papa! Pa-pa!” he called after him, sobbing, “forgive me!” And
Papa, which Natásha, and which Pétya. Everyone shouted, talked, and
“Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor’s portrait is a reward but
particularly calm and absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of
Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills,
partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with
partner’s hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,
part of his legs; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a high
passed his time very gaily. After a short period of adapting himself
passing, but before he had finished his greeting there was a general
passionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivánovna, who had grown fond of
passionately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself
passion but in your own heart. The source of blessedness is not without
passion,” said the latter.
path of virtue,” said the Mason.
patronage at the dancers.
Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter’s day,
pause, “she told him she loved another.”
Pávlovna’s drawing room he considered an important step up in the
Pávlovna, shaking her little shriveled finger at him.
paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,
payments had been diminished by a third, their obligatory manorial work
peace.”
peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I give
peculiarities of his reserved nature, Borís had managed during his
peculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did not see
pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent to
people dancing, Iogel with Natásha, his pride and his best pupil, were
people do understand him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!”
perfect one’s self. And to attain this end, we have the light called
“Perhaps,” coldly and angrily replied Dólokhov, glancing at Sónya,
perhaps dying, while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!”
perhaps I may...”
“Perhaps we’d really better not wake him,” he said hesitating.
permission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a
perseverance, but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can
person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.
Petersburg.
Petersburg earlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation at this
Petersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski” (he took out his notebook
Petersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. He
Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.
“Pétrusha has come with papers from your father,” whispered the
Pétya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, “And me too!”
Pétya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came from behind it.
physically at that moment, there was a weight on his chest and he could
physical things, and the fourth a combination of these. Now and then
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.
Pierre, as in a dream, saw several men standing before him, wearing
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as far
Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and said
Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,
Pierre considered.
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.
Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.
Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they were talking
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, but the bright old
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend’s company
Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed, bent
Pierre, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state to
Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything. He had
Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room
Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source
Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President’s chair sat a
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in
Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dólokhov and
Pierre in his preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be
Pierre, “I said at the time and before anyone else” (she insisted
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. He
Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.
Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason’s face with
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.
Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew’s face,
Pierre paused, seeking a reply.
Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes without
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for
Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in his
Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables and
Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise. He
Pierre sat opposite Dólokhov and Nicholas Rostóv. As usual, he ate and
Pierre’s direction at a slight rustle made by the latter. “Why have
Pierre’s eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some
Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting till
Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart, before his
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque
Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that
Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according to the
Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasíli
Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth, but
Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasíli interrupted him.
Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to
Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was
Pierre, whose preoccupied, absent-minded, and massive figure was a very
Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strange
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The
Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legs
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking at
pilgrimage, of holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the
pistols, and at the word thwee begin to advance.
pity, and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You
place and that he might now be lying, recovering or dying, alone among
places and met in certain habitual groups. A minority of those present
place,” thought Pierre. “It’s even certain that I should have done
plainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who
plainness of speech, uttering the word amant as casually as any other
plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He looked up at the opening
“Plans!” repeated Prince Andrew ironically. “My plans?” he said,
players, or peered at the now cold face of Dólokhov and tried to read
“Plea...” began Dólokhov, but could not at first pronounce the
“Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been together
pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could they
“Please,” he uttered with an effort.
“Please place your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the
“Please, Vasíli Dmítrich,” Natásha was saying, “do come!”
pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true,
pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear
pleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was
Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was making in
political news. It became particularly animated toward the end of the
pomaded hair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as smart as
pondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dólokhov refused to
ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.
porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded whip
position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time
possibility of active brotherly love among men, which Joseph Alexéevich
possible. And I,” continued Pierre, “shot Dólokhov because I
postmaster’s book. Bazdéev had been one of the best-known Freemasons
post of commander in chief as a reward for his victory, does not give up
“Postulant,” to the accompaniment of various knockings with
poured drops from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water.
pour le Roi de Prusse!”
Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings,
power.”
pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.
preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, Anna
preparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of
prepared by long and diligent self-purification, not everyone can hope
prepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry. Unobservant as
preparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everything was
present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
pretext that her aunt wished to hear him.
pretty young Princesses Gorchakóv met suitors there and were married
Preussisch-Eylau.
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, wineglass
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glittered feverishly
Prince Andrew. “I build a house and lay out a garden, and you build
Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her
Prince Andrew made use of Boguchárovo, began building and spent most of
Prince Andrew, recalling his father’s letter. “Yes, we have gained
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father’s
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next
Prince Andrew went out.
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor’s
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, 
Prince Bagratión, distinguished by his Schön Grabern affair and by
“Prince Hippolyte Kurágin—charming young fellow; M.
“Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!” And he jumped up
prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks
Prince Repnín!” and he spurred his horse and galloped away.
Prince Repnín named Lieutenant Sukhtélen.
princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging. Everyone in the
princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dólokhov’s intimacy with
princess. (In accordance with Lise’s and Prince Andrew’s wishes they
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel’s face reminded
Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at something
Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.
Princess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion
Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.
Princess Mary had long since put aside her book: she sat silent, her
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her
Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively
Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down the stocking she was
Princess Mary, then sat thinking for a while with that expression of
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.
Princess Mary was still standing by the cot, gently rocking the baby.
“Princess, my dear, there’s someone driving up the avenue!” she
prince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sent
prince told me to ask,’ and come and tell me her answer.”
Prince Vasíli, as he entered. “I know all about it, and I can tell
Prince Vasíli gave Pierre a significant look.
prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.
principal guests. He was just going to take it when Dólokhov, leaning
principals nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel,
prisoners.”
prizes his freedom which he needs for so many other things. When he
produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
profited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is what you have
promener,” * she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with
pronounced the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.
prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the
proudly at his son.
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. He had
Prussian army, Hélène had suddenly found it necessary to see him.
Prussians without giving them time to finish the parade they had begun,
Pultúsk to Petersburg returns bringing our appointment as commander in
punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir.
purity, and not the serfs’ backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave
pushing back his chair, he rose from the table.
put questions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to
qualifications for it—the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness
quarreled with Hélène, mon cher? You are under a delusion,” said
quarreled with her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad
quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The old
question for her to refuse him. And therefore Nicholas’ first feeling
question for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soon
question he noticed that it should not have been put.
question—one so important that he took no notice of what went
quits... it can’t be!... And why is he doing this to me?” Rostóv
raise him. But as soon as he thought of what he should say, he felt that
raising him.
ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.
rapidly adding up the total of Rostóv’s debt, breaking the chalk as
rarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and Denísov
Rasgulyáy—the coachman Ipátka knows—and look up the gypsy
readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time. His
readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.
reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.
reading them aloud. Bagratión bowed his head and listened:
ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled a
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went
realized as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him,
really good society” consisted of the fascinating Hélène, forsaken
“Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagratión worried himself less before
reasoning contained in the Mason’s words, or believed as a child
reason, or shot a post-boy’s horse with a pistol. That expression
reawakening. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, in
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.
receipt, he left at the end of November, without taking leave of any of
received all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability and beauty. So
receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one’s inner
receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do
reckoning.”
recollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first three
recover.”
recovered, and Rostóv became very friendly with him during his
recross to the other. At last our enemy, Buxhöwden, catches us and
recruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his son
recruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of
referred to in that drawing room as “a man of great merit” (un homme
refuse Iogel and asked Sónya to dance. Denísov sat down by the old
regard him—but you want to cure him from love of him. And he does not
regenerate, purify, and elevate me. But you don’t understand it.”
regeneration, and return to life.
regiments form bands and scour the countryside and put everything
regiment. The faces of these young people, especially those who were
regrettable delusion.”
religion?”
relying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich, you
remaining in Moscow, and only awaited the termination of Denísov’s
remaining strength. He raised his pistol and aimed.
remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a note lying beside
rendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum
renounced your former convictions—do you believe in God?”
repeat his question.
repellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre
replied that it would be more than enough for him and that he gave his
replied: “Yes, yes, I agree,” and with a beaming, childlike smile,
reply—which he would not have received, for the princess was unable to
reproached and disputed with each other.
reproachfully at the count who had presented it to him. Someone
request that he would take no part in the matter, Rostóv agreed to be
resolutely took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and
resolute self-will, “he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like
resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his
respect and honor you, but all the same remember that the future belongs
rest, went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between
retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to
retreating to our frontier—which do today.’
returned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the damask
returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years, had
returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed and
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state
return the holy image.
Rhetor, after a moment’s pause.
Rhetor said, “to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but
Rhetor’s instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre’s
Rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,
Rhetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. “It must be so,
ribbons.
right and what’s good must be judged by one who knows all, but not by
right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. Dólokhov
right! Twenty-one rubles,” he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one
rising in his soul. Dólokhov, Denísov, and Rostóv were now sitting
river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy, who at
room, addressed Pierre.
room, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, guided
room, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.
room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all
room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began
room. The old countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son,
room. The old man already knew everything. He was standing close to
room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade
room with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days of
Rostóv.
Rostóv and Denísov drove away with the wounded Dólokhov.
Rostóv, and Dólokhov—who was now again an officer in the Semënov
Rostóv and had not responded to his greeting. When the Emperor’s
Rostóv as he continued to deal.
Rostóv became thoughtful.
Rostóv felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some joke with
Rostóv felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that
Rostóv, flushing, drew Dólokhov into the next room.
Rostóv for his friendship to her Fédya, often talked to him about her
Rostóv had just prepared a card, by bending the corner of which he
Rostóv hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressing gown,
Rostóv laughed so loud and merrily that Denísov, in his bedroom, felt
Rostóv met Sónya in the drawing room, he reddened. He did not know
Rostóv noticed something new in Dólokhov’s relations with Sónya,
Rostóv recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once had
Rostóv, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised his
Rostóv saw overhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster
Rostóv saw that it had been well considered by them. Sónya had already
Rostóv smiled.
Rostóv’s share in Dólokhov’s duel with Bezúkhov was hushed up by
Rostóv staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, and again
Rostóv submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven
Rostóv was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first
Rostóv went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surprise
Rostóv, when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and
Rostóv, who had completely forgotten Denísov, not wishing anyone to
Rostóv with Dólokhov and Denísov stayed on at the club till late,
rosy, with a dark little mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by
round her head.
round his son’s neck, and without a word he began to sob like a child.
round Sónya and Natásha as the air does before a thunderstorm. Sónya
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,
roused, had begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to
rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he
rubles I don’t know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation of
ruin. Wasn’t he my friend? Wasn’t I fond of him? But it’s not his
running.
Russian.
Russian army. And I won’t—not even if Bonaparte were here at
Russian army! Well, as I was saying,” he continued, recovering his
   Russians! O’er all barriers on!
Russia’s glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell
saber, he sank on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped
saddle sore which, coming after all my previous journeys, quite prevents
said he, bending down a finger.
said her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did
said, holding the casement and not closing it. “With lanterns. Most
said in a tone of indifferent politeness:
said little Iogel coming up to Nicholas. “Look how many charming young
said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a
said Repnín.
said she.
said the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this
said the countess smiling.
said the old man, “say so, my dear sir.” And he suddenly smiled, in
said the princess in a tone of entreaty.
said this some time after she had finished singing. While that untrained
said to be fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop off to Kórchevo
said, without noticing Nicholas.
said without sitting down. “A person of very high standing in our
saint, my angel,” she said with a sigh.
salver, glanced around in dismay, as though seeking help. But all eyes
same.... Is everything ready?” he added. “Only tell me where to go
same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm.
same question. “Will Papa be back soon?”
same way. When did it happen and what has happened? I am well and strong
satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly
sat down again, smiling at the noise they had made and exchanging
sat facing Bagratión and, as the very personification of Moscow
sat playing patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house.
saw a rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into the
saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection,
say I’ll have his head off if everything is not here in a week.
saying. “I have been an atheist,” answered Pierre.
saying.” Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
saying that he must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple.
say it.”
say—“Yes, misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what
Schön Grabern—and he would have found that easier. The committeemen
schools,” he went on, crooking a finger, “education and so forth;
science explaining the whole creation and man’s place in it. To
“Scoundrels! Blackguards!” shrieked the old man, turning his face
screwed up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He was entirely absorbed
seated them on the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members
seats in the dining room, according to their rank and importance: the
secretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the army
secretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.
“See, I’m standing! See!” she said, but could not maintain herself
seeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. He went into
seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to
seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something.
seemed to ask. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.
seemed to give way within him at this news. Dólokhov was a suitable and
seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The old man,
seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
seemed to him that he had expected all this and even more. Trying
seemed to say. She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance
seem to him that everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him.
seen the light, come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue,
see the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid, enlighten, and
see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up
see whether they were getting up.
seized by an unreasoning panic—it occurred to him that the child was
seizing his father’s hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into
self, and so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to
self-derision genuinely Russian. Bilíbin wrote that the obligation of
sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at
sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a
sent Dólokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his
“Separate? Very well, but only if you give me a fortune,” said
serious expression. But the author himself took the verses and began
servant.
served up was received with pleasure by all her visitors. The greatest
service.”
service, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess make
service is to serve under him.”
service to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to a
settled. He came because of Sónya. And Sónya, though she would never
seven he needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had
seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon’s temple,
several persons whom he did not know, giving him a whispered description
several thousand rubles.
Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying to
severe gaze straight on Pierre’s face.
shall not agree with you, and you do not really believe what you are
“Shall we have three cold dishes then?” asked the cook.
She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her. Her
she began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the
she considered the resonance was best.
she felt any symptoms of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and said
She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, took his hand, and
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the
She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it. She waited till the
she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped from under the
She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach.
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long,
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on
she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had
she was not a fool to want to have children, and that she was not going
she was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.
shining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, but believing with
shops, bakers’ signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!” thought
shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and torments
should already have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than
should be if I could now say: ‘Lord, have mercy on me!’... But to
shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he
should one love and what hate? What does one live for? And what am I?
shouted “Hurrah!” in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted
shouting.
showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank,
shown, fired. Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered
shown to the best room, which Dólokhov had taken for that evening. Some
side and at first did not play. Dólokhov kept glancing at him.
sides. He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only
“Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!” ejaculated Nesvítski.
sign.
significant command to come to her on Tuesday.
silent, “that Sónya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet
silent, waiting for what he would say.
simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like
“Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz,” wrote
since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land, they
since the time when he thought his son had been killed, he did not think
sir!”
sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, “it
sister-in-law’s dress.
sister. “Why isn’t she dull and ashamed?”
Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what used
“Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back’s
skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand
sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, and
sleigh and pair at once, and go to Bezúkhov’s, and tell him ‘Count
slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that is covered
smashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank to Bekleshëv,
smile.
smile.
smile, for which he was long unable to forgive himself, “I have lost a
smile of his which seemed to say, “Ah! This is what I like!”
smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in
smiling as if she did not recognize him.
smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.
smiling, glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his
smoke, rendered denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything
Smolénsk threatening Bald Hills—even then I wouldn’t serve in the
Smolyanínov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
snow-covered road, did not once wake up on the way to Moscow, but lay
sobbing like a child. The door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleeves
sobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son’s
society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
society of women was rather derogatory to his manhood. He went to balls
society so dearly and distinctly indicated.
so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costing
So energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordable
so he went from one group to another. Some of the most important old men
“So I can fire when I like!” said Pierre, and at the word
soirees as before—such as she alone had the gift of arranging—at
“So it seems you’re a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about?
Sokólniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless
Sokólniki forest and found Dólokhov, Denísov, and Rostóv already
soldiers, loudly demanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot!
soldiers, officers, and generals were heroes. But the hero of heroes was
soldiers only need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and
so long,” he added.
some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs
some great change had come over him that day. He was silent all through
some of the topics at first lightly touched on: their past life, plans
some reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside
something I cannot inflict on others,” said Prince Andrew, growing
something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and turned quickly
something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small
something toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a good
some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had been
son.
son.
Sónya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look.
Sónya and Dólokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
Sónya interrupted him.
Sónya, Natásha, Pétya, Anna Mikháylovna, Véra, and the old count
Sónya’s joint ages. Rostóv, leaning his head on both hands, sat at
Sónya’s refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of how they
Sónya struck the first chord of the prelude.
Sónya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,
Sónya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she
Sónya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to the
Soon after Prince Andrew’s return the old prince made over to him a
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, not
so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs of
“Sophie,” he began, timidly at first and then more and more
so rapid that they could hardly be his mother’s.
sorrow, sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself
so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was
so strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat
“So that’s what I’m sorry for—human dignity, peace of mind,
so that the maid could hardly get her hair plaited, and she was
“So there’s nothing?”
soul and his face.
soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially
soul to believe and he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfort,
sounding, even the connoisseurs said nothing, but only delighted in
so well how to arrange a feast on an open-handed, hospitable scale,
“So you are not afraid to play with me?” repeated Dólokhov, and as
speak—he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the
speaking French. He opened his eyes. Above him again was the same lofty
speaking of Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom
Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna Pávlovna very naturally asked
speak in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had
special force. No matter what he thought about, he always returned to
spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could go on
spent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow. Besides this the
spiritual needs, while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only
spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous
“Splendid! Excellent!” exclaimed Natásha. “Another verse,” she
sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and ran into the hall. The house
springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him. This
S— S— get the same distinction?”
stages of his journey.
stairs and embraced his sister.
stake of twenty rubles.
state of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court
station), and again embraced his sister.
station, but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a
stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.
stepping into the deep snow. He held the pistol in his right hand at
steps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by
steps. When at last, smartly whirling his partner round in front of her
stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,
stern, shrewd, and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre. He
steward, and again began giving orders. A light footstep and the
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
“Still, don’t ruin yourself!” said Dólokhov with a side glance at
still. “If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could
still in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly laid
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the
“Still the same. Wait, for heaven’s sake. Karl Ivánich always says
stint yourself, we’ll settle afterwards,” he added, turning to
stir, and a footman who had run in announced, with a frightened face:
stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
stood at a window with Dólokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately
stood at every door anxiously noting visitors’ every movement in order
stood cold and silent, as if quite regardless of who had come to it.
stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in evening dress,
stood with the candle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a changed and
stories or telling them, but followed every movement of Rostóv’s
straight! It’s well God had mercy on us. And what was it for? Who
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment
strangely softened but agitated expression on his face. He came up the
stranger.
stranger, looking deeper and deeper into Pierre’s eyes. “And in
strangers and unable to send news of himself. The gazettes from which
stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man. With bated
strayed off the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet,
stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were
stretching himself he rose from the table. “One does get tired sitting
striking chords with his short fingers, his legs thrown back and his
stripes on their bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But it is
struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he had caught
struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. “And why did she resist
study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his head
study, the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning, but he
submit my report, with the information that if the army remains in its
subscribed the same amount as the others.
succeeded!’ The Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to
success.”
success and at the inability of others to understand these things.
Such a friend that I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!”
such an unfortunate and charming woman! Don’t mention him before
such a small, insignificant creature compared with what was passing now
such gratefully religious ones, with offerings of icons and the bread
Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the
suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort, took Rostóv, who
suffer for it.”
suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Looking into
suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.
sufficient ground for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it....
suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly
“Supper, it’s time for supper! And here are the gypsies!”
supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it already
surprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter on an entirely new life quite
surprised Pierre.
surrender of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our
surroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may
survive....”
Suvórov-like, in a kibítka, and is received with acclamations of joy
Suvórov. Moreover, paying such honor to Bagratión was the best way of
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relay
sways the world. Think this over and I will come to you again.”
sword of Frederick the Great.
swords, meaning them to pierce it. But the swords were drawn back from
table, a child’s table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew
table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.
table began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From the dancing
tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone had
take his eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly
taken a ballroom in Bezúkhov’s house, and the ball, as everyone said,
taken off his eyes and, by the faint light of the burning spirit,
taking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the knot hurt
taking his partner with him. He glided silently on one foot half across
taking up a pack he prepared to deal. Rostóv submissively unbent the
talk to her. What a darling Sónya is!” he added with a smile.
task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or
tea?” asked his valet.
tears.
“Tell Bezúkhov to come. I’ll put his name down. Is his wife with
telling him.
tell the truth.
terrible, and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of
terrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expected
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while
terrible voice that the whole house heard it with horror. God knows what
thanked him for his love. His looks thanked her for offering him his
“Thank God!” said the voice. “And Father?”
Thanks to Anna Mikháylovna’s efforts, his own tastes, and the
than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly
that.
that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room came
that divine purity and devotion I look for in women. If I found such a
“that Dólokhov was my lover,” she said in French with her coarse
that end and when did this new, terrible state of things begin? What
That evening, proud of Dólokhov’s proposal, her refusal, and her
that explained their teaching by hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph,” said
that for an instant). Why should he not love her now, and even marry
that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothing
that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him.
that he is probably tired of them,” said another officer.
that—if you consider yourself bound by your promise—it will seem as
that I’m a sharper, so I advise you to be careful.”
“That is enough for me,” said Sónya, blushing.
That is the only reality in the world, all else is folly. It is the one
that is, you want to raise him” (pointing to a peasant who passed by
that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian
that it is we who lost the battle of Pultúsk. In short, we retreat
that I would give my life twice over...” He looked at the countess,
that moment after supper at Prince Vasíli’s, when he spoke those
that moment a third enemy rises before us—namely the Orthodox Russian
that moment his home life, jokes with Pétya, talks with Sónya, duets
that not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure
that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it,
“That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the
“That’s a fine death!” said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkónski.
that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel (the
“That’s capital; of course she’ll forget her childish promises
“That’s it, that’s it!” exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing
that sleep is more important than anything,” whispered Princess Mary
that sort of thing.”
That’s our house,” said Rostóv. “Of course, it’s our house!
“That’s so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a good
that’s the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep
that the pupils’ parents wept at having to let him take their children
that the question of his wife’s guilt which had been tormenting him
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his
that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from
that was good.
that where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs’
that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,
the adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor, who was spoken of
the affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not yet believe that
the affair had come to an actual duel). “You know, Count, it is much
the aim of supporting one another in the path of virtue, and that is how
“The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your
the appointed place.
theater, where he had been with his family and Denísov. He was at once
The band immediately struck up “Conquest’s joyful thunder
The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could not
the battle of Schön Grabern than you do now,” said his son with a
the bigwigs who guided the club’s opinion reappeared, and everybody
The book was the Gospel, and the white thing with the lamp inside was a
the bridges were strong and had handrails. Everything bore an impress of
the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in
the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
the cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face with
The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre’s intentions,
The chief steward, who considered the young count’s attempts almost
The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his forehead
the cleverest among them, including the chief steward, understood from
The club cook and the steward listened to the count’s orders with
The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before met
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer to
the command of the army to General Buxhöwden. During this interregnum
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the
the cot. He did not look round, but still gazing at the infant’s face
the cot where she was standing, “better wait a bit... later...”
The count considered.
the countess; about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The building of a
The countess did not believe her ears. Denísov had proposed. To whom?
The countess glanced at her silent son.
The countess shrugged her shoulders.
“The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at
The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, giving
The count was delighted at Anna Mikháylovna’s taking upon herself one
the court, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his
the dam, the pond, and the bank.
The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was sitting at
the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and
The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,
the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise
the door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant.
“The doubt is flattering,” said “the man of profound intellect,”
The duel between Pierre and Dólokhov was hushed up and, in spite of
the duel with Nesvítski, Bezúkhov’s second. Pierre went home, but
thee, and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!”
the efforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks
the Emperor’s severity regarding duels at that time, neither the
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of
the evening again turned to Borís, asking him in a tone of caressing
“The exchange horses have just come,” answered the servant. “Will
the face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of
the familiar staircase. The well-known old door handle, which always
the felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.
“The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,
the first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little
the first second. “A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French
the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had already
the forests in the province of Kostromá, the land lower down the river,
the French and lay down their arms at the first demand.
the Frenchman Langeron, Kutúzov’s incapacity, and (it was whispered)
The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.
the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.
the general, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were
The girls sprang aside. Denísov hid his hairy legs under the blanket,
the good-natured Iogel, flying about like a feather and bowing according
The Grand Master began reading the statutes. They were very long, and
The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed,
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down in
the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired. He was not dead,
“The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks the
the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity which
“The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish
The highest wisdom has but one science—the science of the whole—the
“The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables, a
the hope of an alliance with her.
the Horse Guards.
The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped
the icon stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers
the inhabitants of the district.
their faces was a quiet and solemn look.
their grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:
their marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid, passionate look on
their meaning but must keep them. The second pair of man’s gloves
their name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you.”
their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete.
their places, and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of
the landing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holding
the last post station but one before Moscow, Denísov had drunk three
The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer
The letter was old, having been written before the battle at
The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her
the Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit down.
“The Lord be thanked, yes!”
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
them, and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others. ‘Ah! So
them, and she doubts the means we have of gaining them. That is the
them are harmful, especially the women. Yes, dear boy,” he continued,
The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering.
the Mason’s arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.
the Mason. “Yes, I never thought of it, but I have led a contemptible
the mazurka, which was just coming into fashion, were danced. Iogel had
The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he had
The members and guests of the club wandered hither and thither, sat,
them from others was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump
the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhöwden. General Buxhöwden was all
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the state
them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a
them—remained for a while without any definite opinion on the subject
them rest and leisure?” said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. “And
themselves and grow more and more miserable.”
themselves, stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being
them something funny and kept them amused, while he watched the young
them strangely of the little princess. But what was still stranger,
them taking off his cap) “from his animal condition and awaken in him
them, when suddenly, clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs,
“Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure your opponent
then all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostromá used to tell
“Then am I to order those large sterlets?” asked the steward.
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia.
then brought back to the general circle.
The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, but
The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old
the new homestead he was constructing and its buildings, but even here,
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the
the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshín, standing close
The novelty Anna Pávlovna was setting before her guests that evening
then quickly glanced at Dólokhov and, bending his finger as he had been
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail; tears
then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been when
Then the voice said something more, Demyán replied, and the steps in
“Then they’ve not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now,
the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that
The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door
“Then when am I to have it?”
then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper.
“Then you are serving?”
the officers as he went: “Have these gentlemen attended to and taken
The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son’s words and began
The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it every
The old count pretended to be angry.
the old lady.
the old man turned angrily away.
the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usual
the onlookers, “Will it be long? Are things ready?”
the other clutched his drooping pistol. His face was pale. Rostóv ran
the other committeemen. “There will be many toasts, it’s time to
the others but win from you. Or are you afraid of me?” he asked again.
the pack. Much depended on Rostóv’s winning or losing on that seven
the people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyone
the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the
the possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have you done
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to
The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman selling
“The praise of a great commander is a soldier’s highest reward,”
the pre-eminence.
the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy’s little red and
The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but on
The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and
the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbed
the Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage.
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented
“There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg.”
“There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army,
there as he. And now—this duel! Have these people no feeling, or
the recruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I had been two hours late
therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?” said the
there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes,
“There is something up,” thought Nicholas, and he was further
“There now, you wish to liberate your serfs,” he continued; “that
there. Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which
“There’s nothing for me to understand,” she cried out with
the resounding strains of the polonaise:
“There’s the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhár,
the rest of his life.
the rest of the evening.
“There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strange. And do you know,
the retreat from Austerlitz, where he alone had withdrawn his column
There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and that
There was no laughter in the maids’ large hall. In the men servants’
There was no one in the hall. “Oh God! Is everyone all right?”
There were in the room a child’s cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a
the Rhetor but Pierre’s sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized by his
The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on his breast,
the Rhetor, “is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses
the room, and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at
the room, pondering over his vicious past, and with a rapturous sense
The Rostóvs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had money enough
the Rostóvs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna
the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,
The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denísov.
the same, then why this duel, this murder? Either I shall kill him, or
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.
the seat indicated to him beside the fair Hélène and listened to the
the serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gone
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,
these same questions which he could not solve and yet could not cease to
the snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself,
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the
The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna
The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,
the state of the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to
The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested selling
the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen among them) listened with
the still greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no one
The stores are empty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox begin looting,
The stranger’s face was not genial, it was even cold and severe, but
The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain;
the table, screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall
the table which was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine,
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that
the termination of the ceremony. He looked up joyfully at the baby when
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
The Torzhók peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering her
The traveler was Joseph Alexéevich Bazdéev, as Pierre saw from the
the tremor of the speaker’s voice—which sometimes almost broke—or
The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the
the uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier. Everywhere one
the wax with the baby’s hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.
the whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative.
the whole human race, offering it in our members an example of piety
The whole interest was concentrated on Rostóv. Instead of sixteen
they all were, or seemed to be, pretty—so rapturous were their smiles
they are beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don’t suppose they are
“They coax me as if I were Váska the cat!” said Denísov jokingly.
they had entered Moscow.
They named the colonel, Prince Repnín.
the youth and inexperience of the sovereign, who had trusted worthless
“They’re always in love with someone,” he thought of Sónya and
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served
“They say Pierre is quite broken by his misfortune.”
They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of the political
they were saying was amusing, but because she felt happy and was unable
things he should have shown it sooner, but he lets it go on for months.
thing we are interested in here,” said the spirit of the place.
think so yourself. And the main thing is,” he continued, “that I
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler’s canteen and
this answer. “Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in
this?” But these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre glanced at
this card and I’ll take my cap and drive home to supper with Denísov,
this holiday time. “Seize the moments of happiness, love and be loved!
this is absolutely true.
“This is not at all the thing,” he said. “What sort of Polish
This is the battle of Pultúsk, which is considered a great victory but
“This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasingly
this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did not understand
this misery, and money, and Dólokhov, and anger, and honor—it’s all
this moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She gazed at him, not taking
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and
This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to the
this speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends.
this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that
those brilliant aged eyes grown old in this conviction, or the calm
those of higher ranks in the Order. 3. Morality. 4. Love of mankind. 5.
those on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were on
thou art wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words,” he
though all were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
though he smiled delightedly. He ran up to them.
though he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms,
though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in the
though shy, went on carefully executing her steps. Denísov did not
thought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seized with
thought, “I must remain free.”
thought of Sónya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself,
thought of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it.”
thought Pierre, “and how little attention we pay to it!”
thought Pierre. “But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,
thought Rostóv. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and
thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall
though without knowing its cause—was such as to remind one still more
thou hast lost.”
“Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou art
thousands such as I in Russia.’
thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses.
three beats: “Oh mio crudele affetto.”... One, two, three... one,
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went
“three,” he went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and
throttle if they stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother,
through, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was aghast
through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to
through the naïve and intelligent count and played with him as with
through the smoke. He was pressing one hand to his left side, while
throwing down his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its own
thyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attained
tidiness and good management. Some domestic serfs Pierre met, in reply
Tíkhon did not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
Tíkhon to ask Mary Bogdánovna what news.—“Say only that ‘the
Tíkhon went and told the prince.
till May, and asked him to be more economical this time. Nicholas had
till now. But where am I?”
till ten o’clock.
    * Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.
time for that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and
time. No, I’ll tell you now. You know Sónya’s my dearest friend.
times before: how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary
time since his return that they had talked alone and about their love.
time till they came to Moscow had not left them for a day.
timidly to the corner where Denísov sat. She saw that everybody was
to above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot also
to all the club members and to all the club guests, and finally to
toast, the count took out his handkerchief and, covering his face, wept
to attain it quickly. Hence we have a secondary aim, that of preparing
to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried
to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natásha’s wildly bright
to be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards’ accounts, according to
to be silent. But after a while, just as a jury comes out of its room,
to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor
to change his former way of life, but his strength failed him. He walked
“To combat the evil which sways the world...” Pierre repeated, and a
to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced
to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter.
to Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wild
to cruel with his subordinates, and went into everything down to the
today or tomorrow—at any rate, in an instant as compared with
today?” was his first thought. “And I did not know this suffering
to do it?”—“Because you married her,” answered an inner voice.
to do what was for him the most difficult thing in life—to say an
to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to him
to enter the Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?”
to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to the
to fight a battle ‘on his own hand’ as the Germans say. He does so.
to fire and sword. The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals
together.”
together, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.
together? And there! Bezúkhov got off scotfree, while Fédya had to
to get more money from the traveler.
to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel—as she
to give in money and work all that other people’s serfs gave—that is
to have any children by me.”
to hear the voices of well-known men. The largest circles formed round
to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became
to herself: “No, I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as
to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea,
to him. Availing himself of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon
to him senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.
to him. We search, but none are to be found. The field marshal grows
to his estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which
to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as his
to hope from him—especially as he did not know how, and did not
to imbibe,” he said. “Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure
    * To indicate he did not want more tea.
to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newly
to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged
to know?” she asked sternly.
to know what is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always will
told him that he should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness of that
told you, but you would not believe it,” she said triumphantly. “He
told you it would not be enough. How much?”
to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the
To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy
tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument
tomorrow... in the evening. You must come.... Come!”
“Tomorrow,” replied Rostóv and left the room.
to my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir,
to my sister today. I will introduce you to her. But of course you know
tonight to my friends—come to the English Hotel.
to offer their services. Most of those present were elderly, respected
to Pierre. He spoke in French. “I only know two very real evils in
to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. The steward
to raise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?”
Torzhók embroidery came into the room offering their services.
Torzhók post station, either there were no horses or the postmaster
to say: “Ah, what have you done to me, and why?” And at the sight
to say, all that could be got out of them.
To say “tomorrow” and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult,
to set the serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses must
to settle here altogether next year....”
to sob aloud.
to stimulate his emotions he looked around. “God, death, love, the
to subscribe all he had, but fearing that it might look like pride
totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on
total of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the other
to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
“To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!” he cried, and at the
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
to the rules of his art, as he collected the tickets from all his
To this chit of a girl, Natásha, who not so long ago was playing with
to those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forgot what the seventh
“To try his luck or the certainty?” Rostóv asked himself.
to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and
touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue
to us.”
toward Anna Pávlovna, and Anna Pávlovna, with the same sad smile with
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He did not know
toward him and said something.
Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon’s
to what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that
to which Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded that
“To your barrier!” and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by
to you. Where are you traveling from?”
traditions of unlimited power, in time when they grow more irritable,
trampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:
transit gloria mundi.”
transparently radiant with impulsive joy.
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.
traveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, began
treated them with absent-minded contempt.
tried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from the
tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. The soft
trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand—a fact that he
tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran
   Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...
troops had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon
trouble, but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him
trowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows, and
trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice,
true, or might at least seem to be true had it not referred to his wife.
trusts to luck, one should make certain,’ and I want to try.”
trying” (Pierre’s modesty made him correct himself) “to live for
tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, came out
Tuesday.
tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom
twelve men in garments like those he had already seen. Some of them
twenty men were gathered round a table at which Dólokhov sat between
two Alexanders—Bekleshëv and Narýshkin—which was a significant
two candles. On the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he
two friends, one of whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious
Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father’s
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and
two thousand rubles, and though he always disliked speaking of money
two, three... One... “Oh mio crudele affetto.”... One, two, three...
two years, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, was
unable to realize where he was.
unable to withstand it now, but he also felt that on what he said now
unappreciated bliss, long past. He could not conceive that a stupid
unbroken and had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon’s doctor,
under him; “turn this way!” he shouted to those with the gun. “It
under his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the
understand, agitated her. She said nothing but looked about uneasily as
understand, and the greatness of something incomprehensible but
understand how one can live with such ideas. I had such moments
understanding half of it, read only to forget, if but for a moment, what
understanding of his employer’s happiness.
understand it so differently. He collected all his strength, to stir and
understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this instant, they
understand. That’s what I’m up to.”
understand what was being read. He managed to follow only the last words
understood, that he could not answer him.
under the shirt sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him
unfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would be
unintentionally, he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw the
universe, and of the courage with which he should endure toils and
unlike the old one, he expected everything to be unusual, even more
unlucky at cards.’ Your cousin is in love with you, I know.”
unpleasant thing to a man’s face, to say what the other, whoever
unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a coffin, the Gospel—it
up against him. He wrote “800 rubles” on a card, but while the
up a glass and a pipe that were handed him.
up, invited him to his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here
up the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss.
up to the altar, placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down,
us but within....”
use of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself carefully scanned
usually so described.
us. Well, you want an argument,” he added, “come on then.”
us—we scuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our side before we
utter a sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan
uttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.
Uvárov, who had arrived with him, paused at the doorway to allow him,
valet had set down the coffee things and left the room. Pierre looked
Valúev was confidentially telling that Uvárov had been sent from
various figures worked upon it, at the other was something resembling an
“Vasíli Denísov, your son’s friend,” he said, introducing
“Vasíli Dmítrich, I’m so sorry for you!... No, but you are so
“Vasíli Dmítrich, I thank you for the honor,” she said, with an
Vasíli’s tone of careless self-assurance that he felt he would be
velvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that
Véra’s remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like
verses called “Enchantress,” which he had composed, and to which he
“Very.”
very briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russians
very glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father—that again
“Very good!” said the prince closing the door behind him, and
very important personage, had been sent on a very important mission to
very much! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active
“Very much,” said Nicholas flushing, and with a stupid careless
very pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was
“Very well,” said Smolyanínov, and went on at once: “Have you any
vessel and judge of its purity? Only by the inner purification of myself
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,
victory, and General Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the
victory over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing,
“Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable
view they were right, as were those too who canonized him and died a
villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know that
virtue was and could not recall it.
virtuous future that seemed to him so easy. It seemed to him that he had
virtuous life of which he had been dreaming since he met Joseph
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,
visitors. There was the fact that only those came who wished to dance
vodka—get on!” Rostóv shouted, when the sleigh was only three
voice.
voice, “but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family
voices.
voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the broken glass and everybody
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre
voice, with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions, was
voulu, George Dandin,’ that’s all we have to say about it!”
vous aime’?” he kept repeating to himself. And when he had said it
vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she had
waited for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more
waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual
waiting for a seven to turn up, gazed at Dólokhov’s hands which held
waiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was
wait only two hours, when, come what might, he would let his excellency
waken...” All rose and cried “Hurrah!” Bagratión also rose and
wake up, Váska!” he went on, turning to Denísov, whose head
walked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with his
wanted.
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
want that. And besides, what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone!
want the money for? As if that money could add a hair’s breadth to
want to, but now I have no time.” Besides, it seemed to him that the
war came contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously
wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen
wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. “I have hundreds of
was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dólokhov cried:
was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down. They were
was again nodding. “Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for
was a great success. There were many pretty girls and the Rostóv girls
was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:
was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for all
was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,
was baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin, while
was beginning, Anna Pávlovna gave one of her soirees. The “cream of
was Borís Drubetskóy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from
was delighted with Denísov’s skill, he was asked again and again as
was downstairs.
was excellent. With the second course, a gigantic sterlet (at sight of
was forgetting. We must have another entrée. Ah, goodness gracious!”
was going home to Vorónezh and Rostóv persuaded him to travel with him
was in raptures about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and
was keeping the bank. Rostóv had not seen him since his proposal and
was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.
was mentioned and, pointing to his forehead, remarked:
was more important than verses, and Bagratión, again preceding all the
was Napoleon—his hero—but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him
was not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever
was often on Dólokhov’s face when looking at him. “Yes, he is a
was silent with his steward, the gardener, and the architect, and though
was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostóv was struck by the
was sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a single candle was burning on
was struck by the change in him. His words were kindly and there was a
was talked of. For the Rostóv family the whole interest of these
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not
was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
was trying to fit music:
water cart, painted green, stood in a shed; the paths were straight,
way, dear boy! Make way, make way!” pushed through the crowd more
way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to Natásha:
way through the crowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a
weakness—the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the
“We are enjoying ourselves! Vasíli Dmítrich is staying a day longer
“We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for right principles.
“We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just
wearing long dresses for the first time. With scarcely any exceptions
wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
we begin a very original and interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is
we can know is that we know nothing. And that’s the height of human
“We can’t have less—yes, three... the mayonnaise, that’s one,”
weeks, and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much
“We had better separate,” he muttered in a broken voice.
we hear is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thing
We knew you’d say so. But it won’t do, because you see, if you say
“Well, all the same, you must refuse him.”
“Well, and are you still true to Borís?” he continued.
“Well, and is that all?” he asked.
“Well, and you? What are your plans?”
“Well, and you, young man,” said he. “How do you feel, mon
well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: “It is not trained,
“Well begin!” said Dólokhov.
well-brushed clothes. There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco.
well for you,” said Natásha, with a responsive smile. “You should
“Well—had a good time?” said the old count, smiling gaily and
“Well?” he asked.
“Well? How do you feel?” he asked.
“Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad,” said Prince Andrew.
“Well, I don’t know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And
“Well, I will read them, then!” Bagratión seemed to say, and,
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of
“We’ll manage very well without a doctor.”
“Well, now to the health of handsome women!” said Dólokhov, and
well remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down the seven of hearts,
“Well!...” said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking
we’ll set off.”
“Well, she loves me and you like that.”
“Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess,” said Mary Bogdánovna, not
“Well then, accept his offer. It’s high time for you to be
“Well then, be quick. We’ll all have breakfast together.”
“Well then, mind and have cocks’ comb in the turtle soup, you
“Well then, tell him so.”
“Well then, that’s excellent,” said he. “We’ll talk it over
“Well then, till tomorrow at Sokólniki,” said Dólokhov, as he took
“Well then, what do you want? You’re all in love nowadays. Well,
“Well, there you see!”
“Well, what is it?” came a sharp, unpleasant voice.
“Well, what’s this now? What have you been up to now, I should like
“Well, what then?”
“Well, won’t you go on? I had a splendid card all ready,” as if it
“Well, you’d better not play,” Dólokhov added, and springing a
“Well, you see, I’ll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two
“We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of
we? No?”
went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here,
went by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek—it could not be hers, she
went on, with a somber and scornful smile. “And thou art more foolish
wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took
were all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the
were also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new
were among the prettiest. They were both particularly happy and gay.
were bringing in jugs and basins, hot water for shaving, and their
were casual guests—chiefly young men, among whom were Denísov,
were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightly
were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany. About twenty people
were lips seeking a kiss.
were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their babies
were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs,
were present, including Dólokhov and Denísov.
were ready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men and women who
were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with its
were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully
were the fun of the game which interested him most.
What a heart!”
“What are you about?” shouted Rostóv, looking at him in an ecstasy
what? A slur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that’s
what a soul there is in Dólokhov, you should see him with his mother.
“What a strange fate, Másha darling!” And having taken off his
“What does harm to another is wrong,” said Pierre, feeling with
“What does this mean?” she brought out.
“What error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even
“Whatever happens to you,” he said, “you must bear it all manfully
“Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to
“What has happened?” he asked himself. “I have killed her lover,
“What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktíst?” said
“What have they taken a baby in there for?” thought Prince Andrew in
what he should do on his estates.
what I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
“What is it?” he said crossly, and, his hand shaking
What is it meant to prove? What? I ask you.”
What is life, and what is death? What power governs all?”
“What is the matter, Mary?”
“What is the matter?” she asked.
“What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you
   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?
“What is this?” thought Nicholas, listening to her with widely
“What is your conception of Freemasonry?”
   What magic power is this recalls me still?
“What nonsense...”
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him
   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
“What’s the matter with you? Are you ill?”
what to do with his hands; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed
“What! To whom?... Nonsense!” cried the count, suddenly reddening
what was going on in the passage. Some women passing with quiet steps in
what was passing in his mind.
“What you have with you: watch, money, rings....”
wheel, which merged in her memory with what followed.)
When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,
“When am I to receive the money, Count?”
When Borís and Anna Pávlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte
When Borís, who was to be served up to the guests, entered the drawing
When everybody rose to go, Hélène who had spoken very little all
when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostóv that he was
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office
when, if you remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees.
When it came to Natásha’s turn to choose a partner, she rose and,
When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his
when they played some tricks on a policeman, didn’t they do it
when they saw his looks.
when we were rejoicing at his happiness! And such a lofty angelic soul
when you began living for others. I experienced just the reverse. I
“When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you’ll get on with her,”
“Where are you going to now, my dear sir?”
“Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
where the clavichord stood.
where the sleighs had been left, in a small clearing in the pine forest
“Where would I not go at the countess’ command!” said Denísov,
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
which aroused his own pity.
which changed his appearance for the worse. There was something naïvely
which covered with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman
which Denísov followed her.
which Dólokhov’s second had called on him, and, having closed the
which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These virtues were:
which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour.
which had grown much older.
which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguely
which held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.
which he presented to Prince Bagratión. On the salver lay some verses
“Which house is it?” asked the driver.
which Ilyá Rostóv blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the footmen
which, in accord with the club custom, he had given up to the hall
which I not only cannot address but which I cannot even express in
which intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one.
“Which is the senior?” he asked, on seeing the prisoners.
which it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation
which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with
which she spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Hélène’s wish.
which the Rostóvs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sónya
which the serfs’ manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the
which they were present, and went to Iogel’s balls for young people
which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the
which to reply to Dólokhov’s words. But before he had thought of
which was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must endure...
which was to be found “the cream of really good society, the bloom
While father and son were having their explanation, the mother and
while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no
while on the scaffolding, in the midst of a talk explaining the future
while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange an
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war and
whisper, “has compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him
white Cossack coat, and bring him along to me.”
white hands with an air of calm importance.
white ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was lit up from
“Who?”
who appeared at his call. “Hurry off and tell Maksím, the gardener,
“Who are you talking about?”
“Who?” asked Rostóv.
who at the Rostóvs’ had jocularly assumed the role of Natásha’s
who could therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersburg and despised
who—dreading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making
whoever he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth,
who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped
who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain,
who had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been
who have striven to attain this mystery, and thereby to render them
who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her
whole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort
who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions, and
whom he now found nothing in common. “We will go after dinner. And
whom should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible,
who recognized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,
who’s a better man than you in every way...”
whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
who was associated by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of
who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting their household
who was passing:
who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his
“Wh-what is the matter?” asked both the young and old Rostóv.
“Why aren’t you serving in the army?”
Why did I bind myself to her? Why did I say ‘Je vous aime’ * to her,
“Why did Sónya run away?” asked Rostóv.
“Why don’t you play?” he asked.
“Why don’t you renew the acquaintance?” said Dólokhov to Rostóv.
“Why do they want to make her sing? How can she sing? There’s
“Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of
“Why, I didn’t recognize you!” he said. But Rostóv was otherwise
“Why, is it late?”
“Why is it wrong?” urged Prince Andrew. “It is not given to man
“Why not wash? That is not cleanly,” said Prince Andrew; “on the
“Why shouldn’t I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you
“Why so?” asked Prince Andrew. “To kill a vicious dog is a very
“Why terrible?” asked Nicholas. “No, Váska is a splendid
“Why, that one, right at the end, the big one. Don’t you see?
“Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you are to
wife: “Ah, why have you done this to me?”
wife’s command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles,
wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the night
will accept them,” said Nesvítski (who like the others concerned in
will all end in nothing!”
Willarski bowed his head.
Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre’s inquiries as
Willarski, whom Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg society, came
will pass here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemen
will. The races, the English Club, sprees with Denísov, and visits to
“Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter....”
“Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready, and
window, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of the
“Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Anger? Women?”
winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostóv spent in Moscow, was one of the
wisdom.”
wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
wishing to take it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent
wish, to court society’s favor. Now he alone was blamed for what had
with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: ‘Let
with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking off his wraps with the
with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming in springtime.
with a mouse.
with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.
with an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most affectionate
with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot.
with a serious expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of
with a sigh.
with a smile.
with a strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward her
with a subtle smile.
with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
with banks still bare of grass. It was at the end of a village that
with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter and
with Dólokhov. “None but fools trust to luck in play,” Dólokhov
with her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as
with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began reading. Only
with him.”
with his eccentric father.
with his eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb,
with his face in his hands.
with his handkerchief, sat down by Natásha and did not leave her for
with his right hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round him,
with his whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed
within.
within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away and
with Kutúzov’s cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the
with lanterns, standing at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. On
with Natásha, piquet with his father, and even his comfortable bed
Without changing his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over his
without delay and carry out instructions!
without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like his
without moving, undertaking nothing....”
without reading it and reread his father’s letter, ending with the
without receiving any explanation.
with profit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation on
with something. It was a coffin with bones inside. He was not at all
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from our
with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother, and
with their management and embezzlement of money, some after their first
with which he listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
woman. Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become
“Women,” he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.
women’s gloves, he said: “Dear brother, these woman’s gloves are
wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone farther, but Antón
word.
word, “and you believed it! Well, what have you proved? What does this
word of honor not to take anything more till the spring. Now only twelve
words could do. You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a
words: “Gallop off to Kórchevo and carry out instructions!”
words he had found so difficult to utter: “I love you.” “It all
words. If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and write
words of Rostopchín, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle
words—the Great All or Nothing-” said he to himself, “or to
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened and someone came in.
working and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calm
work. On a third estate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet
worldly sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into
world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hair
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. He
“Wostóv, get up!”
would at last start on that path of regeneration and on the actively
would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to
would be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule
would be taken immediately to free his serfs—and that till then they
would be too extraordinary,” and at the very moment she thought this,
would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre proposed going to his
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
would happen to him and still more afraid of showing his fear. He felt
would have addressed yourself first to me. In that case you would not
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is
would meet.
would not have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so,”
would not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,
would you now like to look round my place?”
wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital.
wounded in the right hand, taken his sword in the left, and gone
wrinkled soles and palms.
wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down the pack and took
wrong, and further that he was disagreeable and unnatural.
wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best
year?” said “the man of profound intellect.” “Why shouldn’t
“Yes, but it is not as you imagine,” Prince Andrew continued. “I
“Yes, Count,” she would say, “he is too noble and pure-souled for
“Yes, gentlemen, I’ve been told there’s a rumor going about Moscow
“Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They’ve just finished supper. Let me have
“Yes, he is very handsome,” thought Pierre, “and I know him. It
yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit, he is dying, and you come and
“Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons,” said the
“Yes, I do believe in God,” he repeated.
“Yes, I do wish it,” said he.
“Yes, if you put it like that it’s quite a different matter,” said
“Yes... I... I... desire regeneration,” Pierre uttered with
“Yes, I’m tired too,” said Rostóv.
“Yes, indeed!”
“Yes, I never loved her,” said he to himself; “I knew she was a
“Yes, it can’t be helped if they won’t take less. Ah, dear me! I
yes, killed my wife’s lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come
“Yes, my Sónya could not have done otherwise!” thought Nicholas.
“Yes,” said Natásha. “Do you know, Nicholas—don’t be
“Yes, sir, and there’s a light in your father’s study.”
“Yes, that must be so,” thought Pierre, when after these words the
“Yes, that’s me!” she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with
“Yes, this is the one thing left me now,” he said with a sigh.
“Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then,” said Prince
“Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is
“Yes, yes,” assented Pierre.
“Yes, yes,” assented Pierre.
“Yes, yes, do so.”
“Yes, yes,” he muttered, “it will be difficult, I fear, difficult
“Yes, yes, I am unhappy,” assented Pierre. “But what am I to
“Yes... yes, I believe in God,” he said.
“Yes, yes, that is so,” said Pierre joyfully.
“Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir,” said the Mason. “You
“Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So I
“Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!”
Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made since
you!”
“You absolutely must come and see me,” she said in a tone that
you and make you weep.
“You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of
“You are joking,” replied Pierre, growing more and more excited.
“You are most welcome! I know, I know,” said the count, kissing and
“You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,
“You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander’s regiment of Horse
“You are unhappy, my dear sir,” the stranger continued. “You
“You call him Váska? That’s funny! And is he very nice?”
“You can’t come in! You can’t!” said a terrified voice from
    * “You clear out of this.”
“You did not get my letter?” he asked, and not waiting for a
you hurry up? Now then!”
you? I’m awfully glad you’re my brother.” She touched his
“You know her husband, of course?” said Anna Pávlovna, closing her
“You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. You do
“You know N— N— received a snuffbox with the portrait last
“You’ll die and all will end. You’ll die and know all, or cease
“You may punt,” he said.
young aide-de-camp with a smile.
young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozoróvski
young and old men and women Pierre could not understand why he did not
young girls ready for anything and full of hope—experienced the same
young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his
young man’s shoulder.
young master. “Can it be? My treasure!” and Prokófy, trembling with
young son, resting on him and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostóv
you not rest here?”
“You owe forty-three thousand, Count,” said Dólokhov, and
you positively that Hélène is as innocent before you as Christ was
“Your cousin...” Dólokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted
your Denísov though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so
“Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdánovna be sent for?” said one
your eyes,” added Willarski. “I wish you courage and success,”
“Your joke is too bad, it’s witty but unjust,” said Anna
“Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably,” said Napoleon.
yours.”
yourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness
yourself, put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in
“Your son,” wrote Kutúzov, “fell before my eyes, a standard in
you see I do understand. I don’t know how to put it... with this one
you seen Duport?”
you select to be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry.” And after a pause,
“You shan’t have it!” he said distinctly.
you—Sónya. But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender
“Youth is no hindrance to courage,” muttered Sukhtélen in a failing
you were about, challenged a man you are jealous of without cause.”
You were not right, not quite in the right, you were impetuous...”
you, who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have not
you will let me win this ten, or beat it.”
you yourself reported to Count Buxhöwden yesterday, you must think of
“You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!” he ejaculated, and,
﻿


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































     *(2) That suits us down to the ground.
     *(3) Hollow.
     *(4) I just ask you that.
     * A bastard.
Abbé Morio? He is a most interesting man.”
about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....
about the princess’ health and then led Pierre along a stone passage.
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march
absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the
accent.
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though
accomplished.
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of
accounts is a poor creature.”
aches, and one spends all one’s money. He asked me for tonight, but I
a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
acquainted,” and he pressed Borís’ hand. “Do you know, I have not
a crash.
across the table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and
a cup of tea?”
a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
   A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,
added, addressing Prince Vasíli, and without waiting for an answer she
added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows.
added, not noticing his visitor’s sarcastic smile.
adding, “your excellency.”
addressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
addressing the Englishman.
addressing the mother.
Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy
“Adieu, ma bonne,” answered Prince Vasíli turning away from her.
Adieu, Prince! May God support you...”
adjutants.”
administered. Come.”
A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the
advise you to appeal to Rumyántsev through Prince Golítsyn. That would
a father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
affectionate as it was—expressed a sense of his own superiority.
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
affectionately.
“A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed
A footman came in to summon Borís—the princess was going. Pierre, in
a foreigner, in spite of all differences of faith, understood the full
After a few minutes’ bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
After Anna Mikháylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
after Natásha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face
After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him
again expressing deep sorrow.
again going on tiptoe to the reception room where they had left Prince
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
against one of the columns in a respectful attitude implying that he,
again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leaving
against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
again turning to the count. “Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and
again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbé.
age...”
agitated.
ague.
“Ah, Count Rostóv!” exclaimed Pierre joyfully. “Then you are his
“Ah, dear friend,” replied Princess Mary, “I have asked you never
“Ah, don’t talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and
a heavenly feeling. Borís was telling his new friend Pierre who the
“Ah, here she is!” he exclaimed laughing. “My pet, whose name day
“Ah! here’s the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?” said the
“Ah, I know what it is.”
“Ah, is it you, cousin?”
“Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament,” replied the priest, passing
“Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world,”
“Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!...” they suddenly exclaimed, and then
“Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.
“Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!”
“Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you,” said Anna Mikháylovna with a
“Ah, my dear,” said the countess, “my life is not all roses
“Ah, my friend!” said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was
“Ah, my friend!” she said, touching his arm as she had done her
“Ah, my love,” answered Anna Mikháylovna, “God grant you never
“Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our
“Ah, that is just what I tell him!” said she. “I don’t
“Ah! what joy for the princess!” exclaimed she: “At last! I must
“Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte,” said Anna Pávlovna,
“Ah yes, my dear,” said the count, addressing the visitor and
“Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched
aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady’s chair, placing his huge hands
aide-de-camp, “dat one liffs after de sird stroke.”
aides-de-camp to inquire after the count’s health, came himself
aim—to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations—has now decided
A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
a letter has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for
a life I can’t decide or think properly about anything. One’s head
alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tíkhon, wearing
“a little volcano!”
all, and your future depends on him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice
all as they should be? That’s right! The great thing is the serving,
all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards
All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.
“All have secrets of their own,” answered Natásha, getting warmer.
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered
all his decisions and intentions. He went to Kurágin’s.
all his property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre.”
all, like children of my own, as you know.”
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already
all my trouble will have been thrown away.... I shall not be able to
“Allow me, sir,” said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold,
“All right, all right!” said the old count. “He always flares up!
“All right. Fifty imperials ... that I will drink a whole bottle of
all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as
all the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very
all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the
almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
almost time,” she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were
“Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to
alone applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
alone... that tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It’s a
already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided
already known in Moscow and that the ladies about his father—who were
already opening a door.
already prepared...”
already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen into
also in French:
also the Abbé Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
Although Prince Vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely
Although the hall porter saw someone’s carriage standing at the
always accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, “has
always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both
always be my daughters’ first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with
always be the chief desire of everyone else.
always called Natásha a Cossack) and she stroked the child’s arm as
always won. However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness.
ambassadors to compliment the usurper.”
a moment. The sick man was given something to drink, there was a
a moment, “yes, bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don’t
among the children, in the special sense they attached to it.) “Why
an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she
An Anonymous Volunteer, and David Widger
Anatole and Pierre.
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
Anatole stopped him.
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted to
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natásha lifted
     * And all that follows therefrom.
and am at your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you
and Anna Mikháylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was
“And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?”
and asking them all to be seated began:
and a timid smile.
“And at your age what secrets can there be between Natásha and
and began dancing round the room with it.
And Borís, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
and Borís. He is his godson,” she added, her tone suggesting that
And Borís says it is quite possible. You know I have told him all about
and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They
and ceased talking when Véra entered. Sónya and Natásha looked at
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
and countess alike—turned to look at her as if wondering why she had
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
and desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great
and devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince
and don’t forget to give him the Rostóvs’ invitation. They ask him
and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
and fear.
and fussily in the easy chair, “how is it Annette never got married?
and get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now
and had an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for
and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
and hastened to reassure him.
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
and he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame,
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,
and he doesn’t care at all for Julie.”
and he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch.
And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the
and her face was tearful.
and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
and his head tilting yet further back. “Why is it so long?” thought
“And I am still arguing with your husband. I can’t understand why he
and I don’t now.”
“And I had no idea!...” exclaimed Princess Mary. “Ah, Andrew, I
“And I?” he said; “do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the
“And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me
“And it must seem to you,” said Borís flushing slightly, but not
and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
and Julie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking round
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner
and kissed her.
and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
and let us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
and light, joyous steps. At the visitors’ request the young people
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of
“And Lise, your wife?”
and little tables. During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not
and making a wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and
“And me? Would you like to kiss me?” she whispered almost inaudibly,
and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms,
and most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef
and my father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
and no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of
and not become vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded,
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about
and of good family and that’s all I want.”
“And our share?” asked the princess smiling ironically, as if
and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
and put the matter before the Emperor,” said Princess Anna
and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always
and replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First
“André,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
and resignation to the will of God. “If you do not understand these
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
and respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
Andrew, “and at Anna Pávlovna’s they listen to me. And that stupid
Andrew apparently knew this as well as Tíkhon; he looked at his watch
Andrew. “Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish
Andrew?’ I did indeed.” She laughed. “He is so well received
Andrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it
Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
and say, “I am so delighted... Mamma’s health... and Countess
and scapegraces of Petersburg.
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the
And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.
and she found them on my table and said she’d show them to Mamma, and
And she set off at a run along the passage.
“And she’s in love with Borís already. Just fancy!” said the
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
and she won’t say anything to Mamma. Nicholas will tell her himself,
and shouted to the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster;
And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing
and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
and sometimes flung the exercise book away.
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told
“And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?” asked
and stood, hanging her head.
and suddenly determines to speak out.
“And that would be splendid,” said Pierre.
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
“And the fete at the English ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I
and the men’s at the other.
“And then of course my family has also to be considered,” Prince
“And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!” said the
and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they are
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor’s sole and absolute
“And this is gratitude—this is recognition for those who have
and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
and thrill of suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, beyond
and to Pierre, glancing at him again.
and unexpectedly again began to cry.
and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen
and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles
and was crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty
“And what a well-preserved man he was!” remarked the aide-de-camp.
“And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at
and which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged
“And who will inherit his wealth?” he added in a whisper.
“And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a
“And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?” remarked
and will then inherit everything under the will? And if the will and
and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
and wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don’t upset yourself,
“and without holding on to anything. Is that right?”
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
and you.”
and you, mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool,” said the
“And you too!”
an entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
angrily, came in at the other door. Natásha checked her first impulse
Anna Mikháylovna.
Anna Mikháylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet
Anna Mikháylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be
Anna Mikháylovna looked at Véra and paused. The countess pressed her
Anna Mikháylovna paused and waited for him to come up.
Anna Mikháylovna’s face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
Anna Mikháylovna’s was the most distinct.
Anna Mikháylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she
Anna Mikháylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess
Anna Pávlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
Anna Pávlovna disapproved.
Anna Pávlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
Anna Pávlovna in dismay detained him with the words: “Do you know the
Anna Pávlovna’s alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
Anna Pávlovna’s drawing room was gradually filling. The highest
Anna Pávlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
Anna Pávlovna’s reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed
Anna Pávlovna’s soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an
“Annette, for heaven’s sake don’t refuse me,” the countess
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose
another—a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to
another. All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna
another group.
another, hardly able to suppress their laughter.
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,
another who wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet
An outsider is out of place here.... No, don’t distress yourself....
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other
answered Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naïve question.
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
anteroom with him.
Antichrist—I really believe he is Antichrist—I will have nothing
any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident
anyone, and so you don’t deserve to have them.”
anyone else does the same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you
anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction.”
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to
anything, but was only conscious of her stern father’s withered face
anything. Do you know I have sent for Pierre? The count,” pointing to
anything for his happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasíli, and here is money. Write
anything might happen, only not that.
anything wrong in my behavior. But I’ll just tell Mamma how you are
apartments assigned to Prince Vasíli.
a plan of marriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince
a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Véra.
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this
appeared, quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride
appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She
appreciation of the vicomte’s epigram, Pierre again broke into the
approach, but even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water
Apráksina...” and then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put
Apráksins’ I heard a lady asking, ‘Is that the famous Prince
À propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal
are all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit...
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
are—at the heart of affairs and of the world—is the talk all of
are distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children?
are here?”
are, Monsieur Pierre!”
are not many left of us old friends! That’s why I so value your
a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was
are we to find Suvórovs now? Je vous demande un peu,” *(4) said he,
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us
“Are you going to Count Cyril Vladímirovich, my dear?” said the
“Are you living with your mother?”
“Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?”
“Are you ready?” he asked his wife, looking past her.
arm wavered still more with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch
arranged and how nice it all was? There’s Uncle Shinshín’s brother
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
a rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
ascended the carpeted stairs.
as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
as he liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkónski
as he sat on the sloping ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and
as he would have done to a stranger.
aside and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and
as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)—were
as if running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagely
as if she had asked him to do it.
as if to ascertain whether his father’s habits had changed since he
a sign of approaching anger. “I was forgetting... Do you wish it
a sin, a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!” almost shrieked
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
as I write?
ask; but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father’s
asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian’s
asked the son.
asked. “They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
ask forgiveness.
“Ask the count to come to me.”
a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed.” And she
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
a smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared the
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely
As she named the Empress, Anna Pávlovna’s face suddenly assumed an
as she rose to go to her own room.
as soon as all is over,” and Prince Vasíli sighed to intimate what he
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikháylovna, passed the young man
as they said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to
as was his custom when at home—taking leave of a good-looking,
as with his feet.
as ze sanctity of its alliances...” he spoke this last word with
at?”
at all. He said to me, ‘I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear
at all like the conduct of a great man!”
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling
at Anna Pávlovna’s, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andréevich Bolkónski’s estate, the
at Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
at ease by him, “but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it
a tête-à-tête talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
at her reflection in the glass. “She flatters me,” thought the
at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
at last Anna Mikháylovna, still with the same expression, pale but
   At nighttime in the moon’s fair glow
at once transferred to the Guards as a cornet, had been educated from
at once, when she heard the young man’s discreet steps approaching
“At one draught, or he loses!” shouted a fourth.
a treat to her guests. As a clever maître d’hôtel serves up as a
at someone unseen. “Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the
“Attendez,” said Anna Pávlovna, reflecting, “I’ll speak to
attention to her severe remark—and began to laugh. She laughed, and in
attention to his story.
attentive to him. Count Cyril Vladímirovich is your godfather after
At that moment Anna Pávlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
At the men’s end of the table the talk grew more and more animated.
at the Razumóvski’s ball ... and Countess Apráksina ... I was
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess’ ideas;
at this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest
At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long
audible the whole length of the table.
audience over his spectacles and continued.
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
aunt, Anna Pávlovna mentioned each one’s name and then left them.
aunt as she conducted him to her.
auntie Anna Mikháylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of
aunt,” or “You do not know my aunt?” and very gravely conducted
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty’s health.
Author: Leo Tolstoy
a vigorous attack on the orator.
awaiting a reply. He frowned.
aware of a stir all around. He looked up: Dólokhov was standing on the
aware of his weaknesses.
away.
away.
awful...” and he burst into tears.
a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.
a whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society.
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
back!”
back, and bosom—which in the fashion of those days were very much
back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
back to Moscow. Anatole Kurágin’s father managed somehow to get his
badly—all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!”
bald head.
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to
band struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in their
banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to
“Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her
Baron Funke to be appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all
“Bâton de gueules, engrêlé de gueules d’azur—maison Condé,”
battle,” replied Márya Dmítrievna’s deep voice, which easily
be afraid.”
“Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests,” said she in
be announced had passed straight through the glass porch between the
be,” answered the princess joyfully.
bearers and the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the
beaucoup d’estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
beautiful.”
beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she
“Beautiful,” said the doctor in answer to a remark about the
beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at
became quite pleasant again.
because he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses,
“Because I hate ghost stories,” said Prince Hippolyte in a tone
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not
bed.
be difficult to return to the old regime.”
bedroom. Pierre did not eat anything though he would very much have
been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
been forwarded by courier to the commander in chief.
been intriguing!”
been more amusing than the drawing room talk of society scandals, the
been put off,” said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force
been telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!”
been up to heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.
been waiting for.” And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
Before Anna Pávlovna and the others had time to smile their
before. “How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
began crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.
began to arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her
began to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sónya was
began, with a blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified,
behaving with Borís.”
behind her back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning
Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;
behind the chair, held it in position. By the chair stood the priests,
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed
being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,
“Believe me, Prince, a mother’s heart will never forget what you
“Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can,” answered Prince
below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikháylovna into the small
bent arm to Márya Dmítrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair
be. Of the four crystal glasses engraved with the count’s monogram
be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His
Berg as much as you please,” she finished quickly.
Berg smiled joyously. The count, followed by his guests, went into the
beside him and was listening naïvely to his words.
besides! But don’t let’s talk about me; tell me how you managed
“Besides that, Peter Nikoláevich, by exchanging into the Guards
“besides,” thought he, “all such ‘words of honor’ are
beside the bed. Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
bestowed on Véra by Nicholas, was considered very stinging), “and
be the best way.”
betrayal of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending
betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme
better during those awful moments—the father who so remembered
between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from
between his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.
Bezúkhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post.
Bezúkhov’s house that night had gathered to fortify themselves.
big people I write a note: ‘Princess So-and-So desires an interview
bit and I’ll get round him.... Listen! I’ll take your bet tomorrow,
biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expression showed an
blackest ingratitude—in this house...”
blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk,
blue-striped feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort Sónya
blushing:
bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs
body was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasíli
boldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in
Bolkónskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age.
Bolkónski, the little princess’ husband. He was a very handsome young
“Bonaparte has said so,” remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic
Bonaparte’s side.”
bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing while
    BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12
    BOOK ELEVEN: 1812
    BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13
    BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07
    BOOK FOUR: 1806
    BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812
book from the high desk.
    BOOK NINE: 1812
    BOOK ONE: 1805
BOOK ONE: 1805
    BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11
    BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10
    BOOK TEN: 1812
    BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812
    BOOK THREE: 1805
    BOOK TWELVE: 1812
    BOOK TWO: 1805
Borís also,” she went on, gaining a little strength; “he is nice...
Borís blushed.
Borís bowed again politely.
Borís bowed politely. Prince Vasíli without acknowledging the bow
“Borís, come here,” said she with a sly and significant look. “I
Borís felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider
Borís followed her, smiling.
Borís. “He wanted to thank you himself.”
Borís knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the
Borís looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not
Borís, or between you two? It’s all nonsense!”
Borís paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little
Borís quietly left the room and went in search of Natásha. The plump
Borís said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking
“Borís,” she said to her son with a smile, “I shall go in to see
Borís with a smile.
Borís with severity. “I am glad.... Are you here on leave?” he went
Bóry, who had only just entered a regiment of the line and was being
both began to cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to
Both Kurágin and Dólokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes
Both laughed.
bottle. I’ll do it.... Bring a bottle!”
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of
Boulogne expedition.
Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r’s.
Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
bows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances fixed
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
bring me such tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones
broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the
brought at once?”
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war,
burden to him, and Bóry’s life is only just beginning....”
burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours.”
busy, and busy making his father comfortable, while evidently he,
but an hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where
But Anna Mikháylovna did not obey him.
But Anna Mikháylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the
“but as it is, I know every word she utters. She will come running to
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting,
but at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had
“But a very kind man, Prince,” said Anna Mikháylovna with a
But Borís again interrupted him.
But Borís spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into
“But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke,” said the count;
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and
But God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go
“But he must be a Freemason,” said he, referring to the abbé whom
but he went on naïvely looking around through his spectacles as if in
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with
but hopeless: “The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis
“But how are you to get that balance?” Pierre was beginning.
But if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmed
“But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are
but in his usual impulsive and hearty way he took Borís by the hand
but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she
“But, my dear Monsieur Pierre,” said she, “how do you explain the
“But, my dear princess,” answered Anna Mikháylovna blandly but
“But, my dear,” said Prince Vasíli suddenly, clutching the little
“But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the
But neither Anna Mikháylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they
but now we are all going to ——’s.”
     But oh! till then I cannot live!...
“But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: “How is...” and hesitated,
“But, Prince,” said Anna Mikháylovna, “after such a solemn
“But really, hadn’t I better go away?” he asked, looking kindly at
But the princess did not listen to him.
But the smile did not enhance Véra’s beauty as smiles generally do;
“But they say that war has been declared,” replied the visitor.
But those tears were pleasant to them both.
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
but unabashed.
“But what have they been up to?” asked the countess.
“But what is there to say about me?” said Pierre, his face relaxing
“But where is Sónya?”
“But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?”
But won’t you come to this other table?” repeated Anna Pávlovna.
“But you must decide on something! Your father expects it.”
by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don’t even know), the
By Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi
by the amusing scene she foresaw. She drew her wool down through the
by the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the
by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the
by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain
by the whole of the count’s plump figure, in Márya Dmítrievna found
called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation
called him a great man,” remarked the vicomte.
call him but changed her mind. “Let him look for me,” thought she.
calls.’”
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
calmer.
“Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because.... I assure you
came in.
came Márya Dmítrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The
came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
came out—wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast,
came, the pretty, fair-haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Canal. And there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his
“Can I see the count?” Pierre again asked.
cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate.”
“Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times
can rush off alone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those
can’t be done. And besides, if she tells Mamma” (Sónya looked upon
canvas and, scarcely able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying
“Capital!” said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
cap, who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests
card game he was very fond of, was that of listener, especially when he
cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.
cared about; Anna Pávlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
carefully stretching his neck so as not to touch the quilt, followed her
carriage?” he asked his mother with a smile.
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikháylovna touched Pierre’s
carried the whole length of the table.
“Carrot ices.”
carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
“Catch hold of my arm or you’ll drop him!” he heard one of the
     *Catherine.
Catherine’s court, Count Bezúkhov.
Catherine’s day, Count Bezúkhov, and about his illegitimate son
“Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room,” said Prince
Catiche,” * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
cautious movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that
censure, but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. “What
“Certainly; but about Kutúzov, I don’t promise.”
“Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be
chair and pacing up and down the room followed by Tíkhon, who ran after
chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tíkhon.
changed: her eyes became fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad
changing his tone or attitude, “it must seem to you that everyone is
changing the expression of her eyes. “I am a woman, and you think we
Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER I
CHAPTER I
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER IX
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER V
CHAPTER V
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VI
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VIII
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER X
CHAPTER X
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XI
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIII
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XIV
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XIX
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVI
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XVIII
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XX
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXI
    CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXII
    CHAPTER XXIII
    CHAPTER XXIII
    CHAPTER XXIII
    CHAPTER XXIII
    CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIII
    CHAPTER XXIV
    CHAPTER XXIV
    CHAPTER XXIV
    CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXIV
    CHAPTER XXIX
    CHAPTER XXIX
    CHAPTER XXV
    CHAPTER XXV
    CHAPTER XXV
    CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXV
    CHAPTER XXVI
    CHAPTER XXVI
    CHAPTER XXVI
    CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVI
    CHAPTER XXVII
    CHAPTER XXVII
    CHAPTER XXVII
    CHAPTER XXVIII
    CHAPTER XXVIII
    CHAPTER XXVIII
    CHAPTER XXX
    CHAPTER XXX
    CHAPTER XXXI
    CHAPTER XXXI
    CHAPTER XXXII
    CHAPTER XXXII
    CHAPTER XXXIII
    CHAPTER XXXIII
    CHAPTER XXXIV
    CHAPTER XXXIV
    CHAPTER XXXIX
    CHAPTER XXXV
    CHAPTER XXXVI
    CHAPTER XXXVII
    CHAPTER XXXVIII
characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay
Character set encoding: UTF-8
charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
“Charming!” said Anna Pávlovna with an inquiring glance at the
“Charming!” whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into
childhood and lived for years at a time. The Guards had already left
childhood; that same Julie Karágina who had been at the Rostóvs’
child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her
childlike way through his spectacles.
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
children,” she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
children. The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,
choice has fallen. I don’t know what you will think of it, but
Christian...”
circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
cities wondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told
clattering. These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna
clavichord.
clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played first. After she
clever with Véra,” said the count. “Well, what of that? She’s
climb out of the window.
cloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses, and,
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
closer!” she whispered.
close to her, began to whisper something.
close to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and could think only
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was
close, was gazing with astonishment at the angry face of the princess
clouded his mother’s face, and he smiled slightly.
cloudless, northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending
coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity
colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and
“Come along!”
come... he told me himself... but still I should not cry,” and she
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
“Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as
“Come, my dear Anna Mikháylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You
“Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell
“Come on then,” cried Pierre. “Come on!... And we’ll take Bruin
“Come over here, Hélène, dear,” said Anna Pávlovna to the
coming for me to take me there.”
comme il faut, that’s a different matter; but the Kurágins’ set of
Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have
committed a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before
common sense and frank plainness of speech. Márya Dmítrievna was known
comply. Anna Pávlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
concerned with a thought that always occupied her: “Now you see if I
concluded, conscious—as were others—after the words were uttered
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
confession, communion was administered to the dying man, preparations
confidence,” said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
conform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay
conform to them and follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less
confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken
“Connaissez-vous le Proverbe:* ‘Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but
conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
consider characteristic of the country—rumors of war are heard
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by
“Consider my position, Peter Nikoláevich. Were I in the cavalry I
consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have
containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess’ sister-in-law.
contention.
    CONTENTS
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostóva’s big house on
continually changing from French to Russian.
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
continued. During this interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasíli
continued his work.
continued Prince Vasíli, returning to his theme, apparently not
continued the vicomte. “I pity the poor husband, that little officer
continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had already
continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot
contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it.”
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if
conversation.
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm
conversation, and though Anna Pávlovna felt sure he would say something
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order
conversation, gave no reply.
conversation—“I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life
coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, “the vicomte has
correct.
“Cossack!” she said threateningly.
coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
could be discerned.
could not help seeing these people, took any notice of them. “It seems
could not move it. He smashed a pane.
could not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved
count.
count against him, he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to
count, and having kissed his wife’s hand he went back to his study.
Count Bezúkhov’s distress some fifteen times.
count coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added:
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day
countess’ gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing
countess. “I have never seen a handsomer man.”
Countess Rostóva’s carriage in which they were seated drove over the
Countess Rostóva, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was
countess with a gentle smile, looking at Borís and went on, evidently
count. He has, no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it.
count is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to
“Count Rostóv asks you to come to dinner today,” said he, after a
country do we get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows what
count’s niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of her
count’s services, his request would be granted?...”
count’s visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms,
count, with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his
count,” yet ashamed to call him “father.”
couple. In the intervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved
“Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pávlovna
“Cousinage—dangereux voisinage,” * she added.
     * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
coyness and reserve of manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
cream.”
crossed the ballroom, pointing to Natásha.
cry. “I need five hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble
crying. Sónya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and
cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as
cry. Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women
cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed was
curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
current of his thoughts, “that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
cut!”
dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
danger. “I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer,” he
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if
dared to treat Márya Dmítrievna in this fashion.
dark-haired man. This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident
daughter and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat,
daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
daughter’s face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her
day... Natásha, what have I done to deserve it?...”
day,” said the visitor. “What a charming child,” she added,
day was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
day we are keeping. But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended,
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is
Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great
“Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child ...
“Dear, dear! Just look at her!” exclaimed the countess as she
“Dear doctor,” said she, “this young man is the count’s son. Is
dear invalid?” said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look
“Dear princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous
dear, there’s friendship for you,” he repeated. “He’s joining
dear. We will see how Tarás distinguishes himself today. He says Count
declared that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose
declares in ze manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger
declined: I have my daughters to consider.”
deeply.
deferential young man who had entered. “Bring me...” he reflected
delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth,
delight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
depressed, “I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young
“Dere has neffer been a gase,” a German doctor was saying to an
description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:
desperation slammed the door with all her might.
destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!”
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
did not see you.”
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
did Novosíltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot
did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
“‘Dieu me la donne, gare à qui la touche!’’ * They say he was
“Dieu! Mon Dieu!” muttered Anna Pávlovna in a terrified whisper.
differed only in that one had a little mole on her lip which made her
difficulty.
dinner all who came “to congratulate.” The countess wished to have
dinner at the Rostóvs’?”
diplomatist?” asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
dirty feather bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink
disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
disapprovingly, but in whispers and as a great secret.
dispatch? You know everything.”
dissipated life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to
distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikháylovna
distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing
disturbed.
divine Saviour has left for our guidance here below. Let us try to
Dmítri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count’s
Dmítrievna.
Dmítrievna produced no less impression by slight exertions—the least
Dmítrievna’s deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the
doctor with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of
doesn’t make a mess of things!”
does she bother me?” And she added, turning to Véra, “You’ll
doing right. Anna Mikháylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell
do it.”
Dólokhov.
Dólokhov, an officer of the Semënov regiment, a notorious gambler and
Dólokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered
Dólokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezúkhov’s son sent
Dólokhov’s back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit
Dólokhov still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown
Dólokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the
Dólokhov’s words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the
Dólokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window
Dólokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged
Dólokhov was holding the Englishman’s hand and clearly and distinctly
Dólokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. He
done for him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in
do next. Anna Mikháylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood
“Do not let us lose any time...”
“Don’t, Borís! You are such a diplomat that it is really
don’t feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who
“Don’t joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know
don’t know how to hide what I feel.” As he spoke he kept glancing
don’t know me. We have not met for such a long time... not since we
don’t need it? Now you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here
“Don’t tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosíltsev’s
“Don’t touch him! You’ll startle him and then he’ll be killed.
don’t wish to let me go, I’ll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere
“Don’t you want to? Well, then, come here,” said she, and
door, and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, “Wish me
door. While he was getting down from the carriage steps two men, who
“Do promise, do promise, Vasíli!” cried Anna Mikháylovna as he
do the doctors say?” asked the princess after a pause, her worn face
do this for my son—and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,”
down!”
down. Anna Mikháylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of
down, lightly touched his daughter’s hair and sat down again.
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
down the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with
down to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
downwards as was his habit.
downward. When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but
“Do you know,” he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
“Do you know?” said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy
“Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!” said
     *Do you know the proverb?
“Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,”
“Do you or do you not know where that will is?” insisted Prince
do you remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to
“Do you remember me?” asked Borís quietly with a pleasant smile.
“Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see...” was all Natásha
“Do you think he can last till morning?” asked the German,
“Do you think so?... Really? Truly?” she said, quickly smoothing her
drawing room.
drawing room.
drawing room.
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The young
dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely
dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
dress under her, hiding her face with her slender fingers, and sobbing
drew her chair nearer to that of the countess.
driving into the court of Count Bezúkhov’s house. As the wheels
drooping tail.
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
dropping her voice. “My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything.
Drubetskáya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some
duelist, who was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him
dull expression.
dull without you,” said she, giving him a tender smile.
during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
duties on you, and you must be a man.”
dying father. “It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the
dying man, but passed by him, joined the eldest princess, and moved
dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
each other’s arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they
each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a calm look of piety
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
écossaise was ended, he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted
effected the dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured
effect on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been
effort. The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher
effort to look at the servant who stood constantly at the head of the
effort to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp
effort to say this. “Without a name and without means... And it
effrayée, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
egged on against each other.
“Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit,” said she, assuming a soft high
Eh?... What then?... Eh?”
either. Don’t I know that at the rate we are living our means won’t
elder daughter, Countess Véra, with a smile.
elderly face, and she took the money from under the handkerchief.
elders.
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the
eldest who was reading—the one who had met Anna Mikháylovna. The
else,” replied Anna Pávlovna.
embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment;
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
emitting a smoke ring.
emphatically.
en conjure...”
ending Pierre’s unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote
endure this man who is a menace to everything.”
“England is done for,” said he, scowling and pointing his finger
enjoyed narrating all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,
enormous table would say: “Well, Dmítri, you’ll see that things are
enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like
entered his father’s dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasíli
entered their heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.
entered the room.
enter that room.
entrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking to
entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
entreaties. Soon after Anna Pávlovna’s reception Anna Mikháylovna
equality. Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the
equip him.”
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
essential, and after a short interval followed her. Anna Mikháylovna
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince
even try to do so. All were watching the count and Márya Dmítrievna.
“Everybody is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune,
everyone.
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
everyone, including Anna Pávlovna, felt this.
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
everything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to
everything before you, everything. And you....”
Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
everything. I often wonder at you, Annette—how at your age you
everything, only I have nothing....”
everything!” said Nicholas. “And I will prove it to you.”
everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp to the Emperor. You know
evident duty.” She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
evidently did not expect.
evidently listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had done
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
exaggerated grasseyement, “the prince has been scolding Michael
exaggeration quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read
except in the army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.—I
exception made, and Borís transferred into the regiment of Semënov
excitement.
Excuse me, Vicomte—I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it
expect he has forgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days,” said
expecting a crisis.”
expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
expecting the summons to zakúska, * avoid engaging in any long
expecting to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio.
expecting two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who
expedition.... But what’s the southern army to do? Prussia is
experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sónya, muttering to herself,
explaining that Dólokhov was betting with Stevens, an English naval
explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the
exposed—and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as
exposed! If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.
expressions with the choicest French phrases—which was a peculiarity
expression. Véra was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at
expression which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes
extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are
eyes and ears intent on the colonel.
eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
eyes. The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. The man
eyes. The sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall.
eyes, went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading
face, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable
face, and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile
face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a
face assumed its melancholy expression), “he was mentioned at Her
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
face in the lace of her mother’s mantilla—not paying the least
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
face, which had been so radiantly happy all that saint’s day, suddenly
fact.
fact of a great man executing a duc—or even an ordinary man who—is
failed. Borís on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
‘faithful slave,’ as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I
family consultation; is it not so, Prince?”
far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society—I
fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Borís did not laugh.
fast asleep with his head on his arm.
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
fat finger.
father and son. This lasted about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an
father’s face with an eager and respectful look. “How is your
father’s friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God’s sake to
father there would be nothing I could reproach you with,” said Anna
father to be a connection of Prince Vasíli’s. The elderly lady who
father to the ambassador’s entertainment; she wore a ball dress and
favorite, “how is it you have so little tact? Don’t you see you are
fear appeared on her flushed face.
fear would prevent her understanding any of her father’s further
features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
feelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve of
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikháylovna, with
feigned severity. “You spoil her, Ilyá,” she added, turning to her
fellow could have played such a prank on a policeman.
fellow! What you have just said is good, very good. Of course you
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the
felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light
festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome.”
fight Bonaparte by this new science you call ‘strategy.’”
filled by the domestic serfs—the men on one side and the women on
find, and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer
Fine! I don’t want anything, Prince.”
first appearance in society. Anna Pávlovna greeted him with the nod she
    FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20
first he had ever written. Borís and Natásha were at the other window
“First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend’s
“First of all you must drink!”
first of one and then of another priest.
“First-rate,” said Pierre, looking at Dólokhov, who with a bottle
first to one side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident
five years, if he goes on like this?” Presently he added: “That’s
fixed on.
fixed on her.
flabby that they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but
flower tubs and hid there.
followed Anna Mikháylovna out of the carriage, and only then began
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
followed singly. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, the
follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.
following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezúkhov,
follows the current of his own thoughts, “things will have gone too
footing that all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him
footmen and cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezúkhov had a
For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped
for a mere fancy?” said Nicholas taking her hand.
for anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
“Forever?” said the little girl. “Till death itself?”
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
for girls and boys.”
forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father’s
for the attainment of that purpose.
for the countess.”
“For tomorrow!” said he, quickly finding the page and making a
forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from
for your sake.”
found expression in calling her maid “my dear” and speaking to her
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
four times—till I get what I want. I don’t mind what they think of
fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
French families. He is one of the genuine émigrés, the good ones. And
Frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent
French, turning to a general, “my husband is deserting me? He is going
friend...”
friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the
friend’s hand.
friendship.”
friendship at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation.”
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
frigid politeness.
frock and hair.
“From Héloïse?” asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his
from la grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used
from laughing.
from passing, “won’t this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna
from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
from the folds of her frock.
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar’s
from weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in a
“From what I have heard,” said Pierre, blushing and breaking into
from which they had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had
front. Pierre stood smiling but silent. One man, older than the others
fro with dignity, offered surmises about the weather, or touched on
further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand
gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime
gallantry lit up his face and as soon as the last figure of the
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but ... but there are other acts
general commotion. Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously
“General Kutúzov,” said Bolkónski, speaking French and stressing
generally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
general’s three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume,
Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
“Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I’ll do the same thing!”
German accent, “for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He
gesture. Anna Pávlovna meditated.
get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the
giddy even on a staircase,” exclaimed several voices.
girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose
girl, you and your sisters are not heiresses! If you don’t believe me,
gist of the matter lay in that.
“Give me time to collect my wits, Father,” said he, with a smile
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count’s confessor
glanced askance at her husband’s face, and her own assumed the timid,
glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
glass, “or I won’t let you go!”
glass. She went on reading:
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natásha was about to
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had
go.
“God be thanked that you are in time,” said she to one of the
godfather,” she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the
     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
“God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on,” he continued,
“Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold,” said the little princess,
gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a
golden.”) He cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his
Golítsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were,”
gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Borís to her.
good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
Good-by!”
“Good-by, my dear,” said she to the countess who saw her to the
good luck.”
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
“Good night, Lise,” said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand
good part.
good stories about her, while none the less all without exception
“Go on, you must drink it all,” said Anatole, giving Pierre the last
got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikháylovna stepped
graceful and muscular arms and neck. By the grace of her movements,
graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a
grandee of Catherine’s time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
great deal. Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and
greatness of soul?” said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
greediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for
grimace. “I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed
group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to
growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
grown-up young people: Véra beside Berg, and Pierre beside Borís; and
Guards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?”
Guards with the rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment
guess what he wanted; she pointed first to Pierre, then to some drink,
guests joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Márya Dmítrievna’s answer
guests. Natásha, who sat opposite, was looking at Borís as girls of
guests returned to the drawing room and to the count’s study.
guests were all conversing with one another. “The Razumóvskis... It
guests were and exchanging glances with Natásha, who was sitting
had been playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and
had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince
had been spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer
had conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasíli to
had done in Petersburg at Anna Schérer’s reception.
had endured to gain her end.
had had in Anna Pávlovna’s drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from
had left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety
had not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
had only met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in
had on the Spásski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
had uttered them.
hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
half whisper, “everyone knows Count Cyril’s reputation.... He has
hand and said, “Come.” Pierre went with her to the bed on which the
handkerchief and rushed from the room.
handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front of them their eldest
handleless cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid
hands.”
hands.
hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasíli’s eyes evidently
handsome and a terrible scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find
handsome young officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left
hands were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms
hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected
hand to her heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to
hanging down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her
hanging his head, meekly followed her.
happened to touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her
happy smile, ambling lightly up to the count’s niece. “I have come,
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile
Hardly had Borís gone than Sónya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
“Has anything happened?” she asked. “I am so terrified.”
“Has he taken his medicine?”
has married his first cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know.
“Has Prince Vasíli aged much?” asked the countess. “I have not
has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasíli. In
has retained in full force.”
has so many relatives in Moscow! So you are Borís? Of course. Well, now
has to be cunning and cruel.”
have always, thank God, been my children’s friend and had their full
have a room of your own,” and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
have done for us.”
have done your best to increase his mental sufferings.”
have frightened you—sit down and tell me all the news.”
have gone through,” and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
have heard the sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the
have looked at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go.”
have, my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Tarás were
have nothing to complain of.”
have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
have received very little, Prince Vasíli nothing, and it is Monsieur
have something to tell you. Here, here!” and she led him into the
have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
“Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?” she
having given them to the rosy Natásha, who beamed with the pleasure
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror
Having said this she went up to the doctor.
having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the
Having thanked Anna Pávlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began
having turned with words of comfort to her companion, realized that
head and lips indicating very little hope for the patient.
health?”
“Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her
heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the
heard that the war was being discussed had turned from his partner with
hearing how ill he is.”
hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worse
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
heart! You are a Madame de Genlis and nothing more” (this nickname,
“Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish.
“Heavens! what a virulent attack!” replied the prince, not in the
he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
“He chose his friends badly,” interposed Anna Mikháylovna.
“He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might
he could not stop short for the sake of one man’s life.”
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he
he disarmed his hearers.
he dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, and
he had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering;
“He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my
he had met that evening.
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to
“He has made wills enough!” quietly remarked the princess. “But he
He is an aide-de-camp of Kutúzov’s and will be here tonight.”
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
he is Bóry’s godfather—and allow him something for his maintenance,
“He is dozing,” said Anna Mikháylovna, observing that one of the
“He is just the same as ever,” replied Anna Mikháylovna,
“He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had
“He is no more....”
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that
he is Uncle’s aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so
“He is very much altered now,” said Anna Mikháylovna. “Well, as
he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating
held out his cheek.
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
he never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin,” she added with a sigh,
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.
He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such
her.
her.
her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkónskaya,
Here!” exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the
here, is he not? Please announce me.”
“Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Héloïse has
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his
Here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an
Her face became sad.
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half
“Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is
her father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
her foot—which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual
her friend, the princess’ eyes—large, deep and luminous (it seemed
her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbé, as peculiarly choice
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing room with the visitors
her head and continued in a whisper: “Has he performed his final duty,
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law’s
her long hair came down....” Here he could contain himself no
her mother and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even
hero less on earth.”
her over his spectacles.
her own on the subject.
her path.
her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
“Herself,” came the answer in a rough voice, and Márya Dmítrievna
herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object
herself in here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time
herself should she glance round. Anna Mikháylovna, with a meek,
herself wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As
Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikháylovna, stooping, quickly
her sleeves and puffing heavily.
her tenderly and attentively, said severely:
her thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a
her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comforting
her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna
her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
her. “You know, Catiche, that we—you three sisters, Mámontov, and
he said.
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a
“He’s a low fellow, say what you will,” remarked Prince Hippolyte.
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling
He sent for Pierre and said to him: “My dear fellow, if you are going
He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Borís down one flight of
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to
He sighed.
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great
he suddenly cried. “Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
he (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), “but Bonaparte when
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dólokhov
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
He vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.
he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezúkhov’s fortune,
he was asleep in his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre
“He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary’s
he wore the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were
he worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing
hid her face still deeper in the bed. Natásha wept, sitting on the
highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might
him!”
him.”
him and, with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
him and would not have others do so.”
him as a man, but what can one do?”
him a taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him,
him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who...”
him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
him except the young princesses.... They are still young....” She bent
him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
him, handing him different articles of clothing. “What of Sweden? How
him... Olga, go and see whether Uncle’s beef tea is ready—it is
him or her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her
himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have they
himself on a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from
himself on his seat.
himself undertook his daughter’s education, and to develop these two
him. That’s a thing I hate! Everything is possible.”
him, though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort
him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition
Hippolyte burst out laughing.
Hippolyte in the carriage, “your little princess is very nice, very
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
Hippolyte “—so dull—. It has been a delightful evening, has it
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, “And you were
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
his career. Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of
“His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is
his companion. The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards,
His daughter, Princess Hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly
his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
his eyes and thought he would never open them again. Suddenly he was
his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
his face, began to talk—as one who has long had something on his mind
his father dismissed the abbé and said to the young man, “Now go
his father’s part of the house. Entering the drawing room, where the
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
his gray hair.
his hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his
his handsome face. Natásha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
his impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can’t help it), he
his kindly, simple, and modest expression. Anna Pávlovna turned toward
his legs. Pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself
his mind that they would be friends.
his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and
his neighbors’ glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn,
his noble soul peacefully to leave this...”
his nose.
his own helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected
his plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision
his pocketbook.
his portrait, “definitely demanded that he should be called.”
his rising. “This unfortunate fete at the ambassador’s deprives me
his rooms upstairs.
his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner.
his shoulders.
his shoulders. “Women, my dear fellow; women!”
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes. From
his utmost to look as small as possible. He looked at the count, who
his youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and were
“Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see
holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood
holding the bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
hope you will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre.”
horror and fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes.
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre’s sacrilegious words
     * Hors d’oeuvres.
horse—that I’ll warrant,” said Shinshín, patting him on the
hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
hour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging their
hour. Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count’s face began
house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and
household. And there in fact was Sónya lying face downward on Nurse’s
house. Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be
house, you know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my
“How about my son Borís, Prince?” said she, hurrying after him into
“How can he talk like that?” thought Pierre. He considered his
“How do you do, cousin?” said Pierre. “You don’t recognize
“How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name
“How do you expect him to answer you all at once?” said Prince
how do you judge of it?” he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he
however, for he will leave us again to take part in this unhappy war
“How funny you are!” he said, bending down to her and blushing still
“How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!” remarked the
“How is it,” she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly
“How is the count? Can I see him?” asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual,
“How lovely!” said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
“How often have I asked you not to take my things?” she said. “You
“How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their
How stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
how to arrange it. What do you think?”
how we went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It’s such an
husband.
husband. Prince Andrew’s eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
hussar, “and why are you exciting yourself? Do you think the French
“I am afraid of mixing the figures,” Pierre replied; “but if you
“I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency,”
I am dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves” (and her
“I am expecting you, Pierre,” said the same voice, but gently and
“I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our
“I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You
“I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna
“I am living at Countess Rostóva’s,” replied Borís, again
“I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas.”
“I am quite of your opinion,” replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning
“I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
“I am so sorry for the poor count,” said the visitor. “He is in
“I am speaking ze truce,” replied the hussar with a smile.
I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously.”
I am told.”
“I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador’s,” said Prince
“I am very sorry, ma’am,” answered the maid.
“I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher,” or “ma chère”—he
“I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my
“I bet a hundred on Stevens!” shouted one.
“I bet fifty imperials”—he spoke French that the Englishman might
“I bet on Dólokhov!” cried a third. “Kurágin, you part our
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
“I can’t bear the sight of that woman.”
“I can tell you more,” continued Prince Vasíli, seizing her hand,
“I can’t help it,” said the prince. “Lavater would have said I
“Ice pudding, but you won’t get any,” said Márya Dmítrievna.
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and
I consider it my duty to let you know of it. He is said to be very
I could not have done it myself, I should not have had the courage, but
idiot!... But what’s the good?...” and he waved his arm.
“I don’t even know what is in this paper,” said the younger of
“I don’t like you to talk like that.”
I don’t speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don’t like him,” she
“I don’t understand it,” replied Prince Andrew. “Women who are
“I don’t understand, Mamma—what is his attitude to Pierre?”
“I don’t understand. What’s it all about?”
I don’t want to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and
“If anyone comes meddling again,” said he, emitting the words
“If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer,” the
“If he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the
if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
if it is to last. Prince Vasíli knew this, and having once realized
“If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle,”
“If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no
“If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of
if the whole world had gone crazy.”
“If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have
if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
“If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone,” she replied
“If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
“I have already told you, Papa,” said his son, “that if you
“I have come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not
“I have four sons in the army but still I don’t fret. It is all
I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival
“I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run
“I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times.”
“I knew the princess at once,” put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.
“I knew you would be here,” replied Pierre. “I will come to supper
“I know, I know,” answered Prince Vasíli in his monotonous voice.
“I know, my dear, kind princess,” said Anna Mikháylovna, seizing
“I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid;
“I know your heart,” repeated the prince. “I value your friendship
“I’ll drink it! Let’s have a bottle of rum!” shouted Pierre,
illegitimate.”
I’ll find you another place.”
ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word...”
“I’ll let two more letters pass, but the third I’ll read,” said
illness. Prince Vasíli said something to Lorrain in passing and went
ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.
imagine that their children have no secrets from them. “I know I shall
impatience, while the princess jumped up and with a gesture of
impatiently, “I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about
imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred?” added he,
importance of the rite now being performed and even approved of it. He
important. What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from
impossible...”
impossible not to notice his face. Dólokhov was a man of small means
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
“I’m quite worn out by these callers. However, I’ll see her and
I myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... No, excuse me!
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
in amazement.
“In a minute, in a minute,” he said, dipping his pen.
“In a moment. À propos,” she added, becoming calm again, “I am
inappropriate, she was unable to stop him.
in a tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will
in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess’
indifferently to his wife’s chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
indiscretion, nodded and said: “I hope to see you again, but I also
indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.
“I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
infamous, vile woman!”
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized
in geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.
in God’s hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
in his tone, “my dear,” whether they were above or below him in
in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
in his writing table, and this is a paper he has forgotten....”
in.’ I do not know how far he was justified in saying so.”
injuries—and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing
in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers—was just at that
innocent and untried?”
In passing Prince Vasíli seized Pierre’s hand and said to Anna
in perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
in Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day
in Princess Drubetskáya’s case he felt, after her second appeal,
inquiry. The son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
in society it seems as if there were something in them, but there’s
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
in some way essential.
instrument he could not begin to speak.
intelligent, and resolute young man.
intelligent, how is it you don’t see that if the count has written a
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant
intercourse with young women.
interesting.”
interesting but hardly feasible.”
interfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man’s room?
interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and
in the country.”
In the count’s room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked
In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.
in the drawing room, waiting for Borís to come out. She was already
in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on
in the house was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pávlovna burst
In the midst of the third écossaise there was a clatter of chairs being
In the morning Anna Mikháylovna said to Pierre:
in the same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the
in the small circular room. Around the table all who were at Count
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning before
into a careless, merry smile. “What am I? An illegitimate son!”
into Borís’ eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and
into her radiant smile.
into the naïvely symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently
into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where you
Intriguer!” she hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the
invalid chair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on
invalid,” said Anna Pávlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her
invitation to Anna Pávlovna’s reception and had sat listening to
“I often think,” she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer
“I often think, though, perhaps it’s a sin,” said the princess,
“I recognize you only too well, too well.”
“I rely on you, my dear,” said Anna Pávlovna, also in a low tone.
ironical voice.
irrepressible hatred.
irreproachably washed, brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the
irritation.
is all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give
“I say so,” he continued desperately, “because the Bourbons fled
“I say, this is folly! He’ll be killed,” said this more sensible
is betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign
is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
is going as a cadet. There’s no one to interest himself for him. To
“I shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward,
“I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors...”
“I shall be delighted to meet them,” said the prince. “But
I shall be in a more prominent position,” continued Berg, “and
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10—Annette
“I should like,” said the vicomte, “to ask how monsieur explains
“I should like to go to Kurágin’s,” thought he.
“I should think he has a score of them.”
“I should think not,” said Véra, “because there can never be
“‘I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow
is how I explain it to myself. It can’t be helped!”
“Is it certain?” she said.
“Is it possible?” exclaimed Anna Mikháylovna. “Oh, how awful!
is my witness,” and she made the sign of the cross, “I love her so
“Isn’t she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train
“Is that Mary practicing? Let’s go quietly and take her by
“Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?” said Anatole.
is the only difference between them.” He said this smiling in a way
“Is this the way to the princesses’ apartments?” asked Anna
“I still can’t understand what you are afraid of,” said Prince
is very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess
Italian: “‘Dio mi l’ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!’’
Italian to give her lessons.”
“It all depends on the bringing up,” remarked the visitor.
it all very well for Prince Vasíli told me himself. Besides, Cyril
it. And he is so clever and so good!” said Natásha. “Don’t
it...” answered her son coldly. “But I have promised and will do it
it at that age.”
It can’t be helped!” said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
it escape from his handsome mouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an
it had appeared. The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were
“I think,” said the prince with a smile, “that if you had been
“I thought perhaps something had happened,” she said with her
“I thought today’s fete had been canceled. I confess all these
“It is dreadful, dreadful!” she was saying, “but cost me what it
   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
“It is for the reasson, my goot sir,” said he, speaking with a
it is for you to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for
it is. My dear pet!”
It is terrible to think.... This is my son,” she added, indicating
“It is the Buonapartists who say that,” replied the vicomte without
“It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
it is. You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the
it necessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the least
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pávlovna and the
it,’” Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
“It’s all about the war,” the count shouted down the table. “You
“It’s all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and
it seemed quite natural that they should cry, and apparently it never
“It seems funny to me,” said Pierre, “that you, you should
“It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do
“It’s empty.”
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was
“It’s in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow,”
“It’s not at all from friendship,” declared Nicholas, flaring
“It’s not going to be a ghost story?” said he, sitting down beside
“It’s nothing, nothing; leave me alone!” sobbed Sónya.
it’s splendid. I am very glad to have made your acquaintance. It’s
“It’s that protégé of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskáya,
it timidly and tenderly on her son’s arm, “be affectionate and
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
“It von’t go begging,” replied the German with a smile.
“It was all they could do to rescue the poor man,” continued the
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasíli that she had obtained an
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pávlovna
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,
It was past one o’clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a
It was plain that this “well?” referred to much that they both
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but
It was St. Natalia’s day and the name day of two of the Rostóvs—the
Ivánovich. He is in a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared.”
“I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles,” and taking
“I want to know!”
I was saying, Prince Vasíli is the next heir through his wife, but the
“I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.
“I will,” replied Natásha.
“I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can’t.”
“I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?” asked the
jacket.
“Jacob, bring a bottle!” shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow
jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner,
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she
JULIE
Julie wrote in French:
jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were
just completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His
“Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!” loudly remarked
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the
just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bark.
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
kept looking round toward the drawing room door. It opened and Nicholas
kindhearted, and because they—friends from childhood—had to think
kindness!” He turned to go.
kind relation. But, Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do
kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,
kissing each other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew’s surprise
“Kiss the doll,” said she.
kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently
knee with the palm of his hand.
knew....”
knew what those society women are, and women in general! My father is
know his character: noble, upright ... but you see he has no one with
know how fond the count is of her.”
know how to dance, had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies
know how to deal with them.”
know how to equip Borís.” She took out her handkerchief and began to
know how to express it ... not by a balance of political power....”
knowledge.
know my son’s going, Márya Dmítrievna? My son is going.”
known as la femme la plus séduisante de Pétersbourg, * was also there.
know what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love
know yourself that last winter the count made a will by which he left
Kurágin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which
Kutúzov ... recommend Borís to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at
“La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the
lack the bump of paternity.”
ladies’ end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the
lad jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
lady, adding the priest’s clerical title, as if she had no opinion of
lady visitor.
Language: English
larger circle.
lashes, thick black plaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny
last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words
last long? It’s all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in the
last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to let
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
Last Updated: January 21, 2019
late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting
lathe?” asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
laughed. “I dreamed last night...”—“You were not expecting
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
laughed. “Véra’s spiteful; never mind her! And all will come right
laughter led by Natásha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
laws of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of
leaning his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand. After
learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said
least disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
leave me alone with him!”
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance
left like this. Every moment is precious. I can’t think why his nieces
left the chair on which he had been leaning, and—with an air
legal heir to everything and you won’t get anything. You must know,
legs, looked directly at Prince Vasíli with no sign of emotion in her
length portrait of Catherine the Great. The same people were still
leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
lesson, was about to leave: “Mathematics are most important, madam!
less than you do, but be a man!”
“Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go
let her know.”
“Let him do it, let him do it,” said Dólokhov, smiling.
“Let’s come, quick, quick!” And with a glance round, she smiled at
letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation
letter to the Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it
“Let us go and have supper,” he said with a sigh, going to the door.
“Liberty and equality,” said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at
Life Guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the window
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
lighted mirrors which repeated their reflections several times. Now
light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary
lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying
liked to. He looked inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was
like that six months ago?”
like these if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pávlovna. “You are
linen shirt unfastened in front. “Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is
“Lise, I beg you to desist,” said Prince Andrew still more
“Lise!” said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
Lise sighed too.
Lise? Take her to your room and I’ll go to Father. How is he? Just the
“Lise!” was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed
Lise, young Bolkónski’s wife, this very evening, and perhaps the
“Listen, dear Annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking Anna
listened attentively. His favorite occupation when not playing boston, a
listen to his tale.
“Listen to me, Prince,” said she. “I have never yet asked you
listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was
lit room adjoining the count’s reception room. It was one of those
little fingers. “All right! Then it’s settled?”
little princess.
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condé
little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
little table, and Anna Mikháylovna noticed that something was agitating
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
lively disposition, bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked
lively little girl’s look made him inclined to laugh without knowing
livery, get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some
loftiness of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to
London—could pronounce Pitt’s sentence, he saw a well-built and
longer and went on, between gasps of laughter: “And the whole world
“Look at Papa!” shouted Natásha to the whole company, and quite
“look at Papa!” though as it was they never took their eyes off the
looked like tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the
look for her.
Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and
looking at Pierre. “At the present time it is difficult to know the
Lorrain considered.
Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before
Lorrain’s instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
lost....” And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian
lost count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite.”
loud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. “Why
love, love of one’s neighbor, love of one’s enemy, is worthier,
lovers of music do when they hear a false note. The two women let go
loving and honoring him. “Why, I have not yet had time to settle
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually
low tones.
ma chère! On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!”
“Ma chère, there is a time for everything,” said the countess with
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pávlovna moved about her
“Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!” shouted laughing voices
“Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience,” said he,
made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
made for the sacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle
Madeira”... “Hungarian”... or “Rhine wine” as the case might
maid of honor’s hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro
maid with the decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything
majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
majestic figure of his father, Count Bezúkhov, with that gray mane of
Majesty’s and you were pitied....”
Majesty, “who, thank God, was better today.” And each visitor,
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pávlovna,
make something exceptional of them,” said the visitor.
Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apráksins’. Read the
“Mamma!” rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,
“Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers.”
“Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?” and Natásha’s voice
“Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?” Natásha again cried
man.
managed to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against
man. Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes
mane—which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight
man.... Here he is, and the count has not once asked for him.”
man is the count’s son,” she added more softly. “What a terrible
manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which
manner nor a desire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
man’s hand and moving her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre,
man’s high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
man’s simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both
man. The Revolution was a grand thing!” continued Monsieur Pierre,
marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward
marry!” concluded Prince Andrew.
MARY
Márya Dmítrievna.
Márya Dmítrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the
“Márya Dmítrievna?” came her voice from there.
Márya Dmítrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened his
Márya Dmítrievna on her right and Anna Mikháylovna on her left, the
“Márya Dmítrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don’t like ice
“Márya Lvóvna Karágina and her daughter!” announced the
Mary Bolkónskaya.”
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
Mary, having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day’s
matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
may I shall do my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not be
me!”
me?”
me.”
mean good French society—will have been forever destroyed, and
meant by the words all is over, “and the count’s papers are opened,
Meanwhile Prince Vasíli had opened the door into the princess’ room.
Meanwhile the younger generation: Borís, the officer, Anna
me; but, my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for
me, but that he’ll marry Julie. You see how he’s been with her all
me!” He began to laugh. “Well, what of it! I hope we’ll get better
me. I am used to suffering.”
memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything,
memory, I will do the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the
men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides.
men’s end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the
me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I
me only the day before yesterday not to forget Borís. But he had
me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests.”
merrily.
merrily and prettily as ever.
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her
merry.
me to inform you... But, don’t be uneasy,” he added, noticing that
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary’s heavy tread and the
middle of his mouth and with red lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting
middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,
might be up to on the sly” (she meant that they would be kissing),
might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in
Mikháylovna.
Mikháylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
Mikháylovna as she entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who,
Mikháylovna Drubetskáya. Rostóv, the father, is Ilyá, and his son is
Mikháylovna enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she
Mikháylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as
Mikháylovna in passing instinctively glanced into the room, where
Mikháylovna looked attentively at the sick man’s eyes, trying to
Mikháylovna made a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick
Mikháylovna of one of them.
Mikháylovna, or you will not hold out.”
Mikháylovna pass and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them
Mikháylovna returned to the Rostóvs’ and went to bed. On waking in
Mikháylovna?” said he. “Let us wait until evening. The doctors are
Mikháylovna,” said Prince Vasíli, arranging his lace frill, and in
Mikháylovna’s son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count’s eldest
Mikháylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
Mikháylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
Mikhelson’s army I understand—Tolstóy ‘s too... a simultaneous
Milan?” asked Anna Pávlovna, “and of the comedy of the people of
“Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me,”
mind at rest,” said he without altering his tone, beneath the
“Mind, no holding on!” cried another.
mind once for all that what he saw happening around him that evening was
mine. I have written to my poor mother,” said the smiling Mademoiselle
ministers and great people, and know how to deal with them all! It’s
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again
mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing—or all that is
moment!”
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
moment imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just
“Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!” she muttered, and lifting her dress with one
Monsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of
more and holding out the letter.
more animated. “And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their
more, but he waited and did nothing.
more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round
more than they did Anatole. Dólokhov could play all games and nearly
more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my
morning.
morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
morning or evening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole
morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well.”
morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the
Moscow for his equipment, was to join them on the march to Radzivílov.
“Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip,” Borís went on.
Moscow when Borís was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him,
most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the
mother and the youngest daughter—both named Nataly. Ever since
mother, drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying
Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
mother, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning
mothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen.”
motive of his visit, “is it true that the Dowager Empress wants
mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
much, and all of you, only Véra... And what for? What have I done
much prettier. Pierre was received as if he were a corpse or a leper.
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg
murder of the Duc d’Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d’Enghien
must be broken off ... and then you know, André...” (she looked
must excuse me,” said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put
must put in an appearance there,” said the prince. “My daughter is
“My dear Anna Mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
“My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you—I knew your
“My dear Borís,” said Princess Anna Mikháylovna to her son as
“My dear!” exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand
“My dear Princess Catherine Semënovna,” began Prince Vasíli
“My dear,” she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a
my dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that he
my friend... I only need see Prince Vasíli Sergéevich: he is staying
“My friend,” said Anna Mikháylovna in gentle tones, addressing
my geometry lessons,” said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons
“My part is played out,” said Prince Andrew. “What’s the use of
my relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though
my wife—are the count’s only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard
“My wife,” continued Prince Andrew, “is an excellent woman, one
name-day party.
napkin, from behind the next man’s shoulders and whispered: “Dry
Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was
Napoleon’s words. “‘I opened my antechambers and they crowded
“Natálya Ilyníchna behaves very well to me,” remarked Borís. “I
Natásha blushed and laughed.
Natásha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing and
Natásha considered.
Natásha did not like the visitor’s tone of condescension to childish
“Natásha,” he said, “you know that I love you, but....”
Natásha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to
Natásha kissed her on the hair.
Natásha only desisted when she had been told that there would be
Natásha, raising her face for a moment from her mother’s mantilla,
Natásha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even
Natásha’s large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she
Natásha, stopping suddenly. “I feel so happy!”
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
near the strange lady. Prince Vasíli in front of the door, near the
necessary. Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by
necessary,” said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the
necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even
necessary to take some part in it.
neck and the corners of her mouth drooped.
neither I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him.”
neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natásha dashed swiftly among the
neutral... I know that. What about Austria?” said he, rising from his
neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty
never favorably disposed toward him—would have used it to turn the
“Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That’s my advice: never marry
never understand it, because you’ve never loved anyone. You have no
news I may take back to my poor boy.”
Next day Prince Vasíli had arrived and settled in the count’s house.
next glanced round in alarm.
nice indeed, quite French,” and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
Nicholas’ career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God
Nicholas. I never knew any Madame Jacquot.”
“Nicholas is going away in a week’s time, his... papers... have
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sónya, beside Julie Karágina, to
Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikháylovna
(nicknamed in society, “the King of Prussia”) ever since the Emperor
night a motley throng of people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly
“No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have....”
“No, but do promise! I won’t let you go! My dear benefactor...”
“No, but I say,” said Pierre, calming down, “you are a wonderful
“No,” cried he, becoming more and more eager, “Napoleon is great
“No, fifty,” replied the latter.
no fruit. I never could understand the fondness some people have for
“No, he thinks only of himself,” muttered the princess without
“No, I have a wicked heart.”
“No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted
“No, impossible!” said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing
“No, I won’t promise that. You don’t know how Kutúzov is pestered
“No, I won’t,” said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up
no more. She is so affected. Ask her in,” she said to the footman in a
none to anyone.”
“Non, madame.” He smiled quite inappropriately.
“No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne,” said
nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other
“Nonsense, nonsense!” cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to
nonsense out of your head.”
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from
“No, Peter Nikoláevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
“Not all, for you will not be there; not all,” said Prince Hippolyte
not attract a moment’s attention to their own evolutions and did not
not? Delightful!”
not disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
note. I am in such a state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince
“No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business,
nothing.
nothing about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude—the
nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit,” continued Prince
Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever
nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don’t marry, my dear fellow; don’t
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to the back
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
not ill-spent. He is worth it!”
no time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father’s
“Not in the least,” replied the vicomte. “After the murder of the
not knowing what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna
not knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man “the
Not letting the abbé and Pierre escape, Anna Pávlovna, the more
not love liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and
not right.”
not see him at all.”
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasíli with head erect
not wanted here? Go to the other girls, or...”
“Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came
“No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of
now approached the sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor
now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
“Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart.”
“No! What kind, Márya Dmítrievna? What kind?” she almost screamed;
Nowhere to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just
“Now I am all right,” she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
“Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing—I know!” cried
now on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant
now permissible; “the door to the left, ma’am.”
now rose and took their leave. The visitor’s daughter was already
“Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you,” said the
“Now, Véra, what does it matter to you?” said Natásha in defense,
“No, you’ll never manage him that way,” said Anatole. “Wait a
nursery.”
obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
occurred to him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief
Odýntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
o’erpassed,” said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat
of a girl, but I like her.”
of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and
of an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you
of a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave
of assurance and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
of Bonaparte.
of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was
of Count Bezúkhov’s death. She said the count had died as she would
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
of everything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing—she had had twelve.
of fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves
offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
off his cloak.
officer in the Semënov regiment with whom Borís was to travel to join
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
official appointed to the province in which the prince’s estate lay
of for a single moment during the whole service. He judged by the
of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed.
of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s’ensuit!* That’s certain.”
of her saint’s-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to
of his coat and looking down at him—the Englishman was short—began
of his mouth and winking at the count.
of his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone
of his speech. “Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l’état; *
of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem in
of its honeyed firmness and softness.
of its rightful king,” she concluded, trying to be amiable to the
of it. The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then
of life, with his delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the
of love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of
of mingled shame and vexation.
of one another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each
of Prussia’s consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me
of rum in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of
of,” said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
of Sónya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
of speech and of the press—and only for that reason did he obtain
Of the behavior of the eldest princess and Prince Vasíli she spoke
of the Guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
of them forgot what was happening and what was about to happen in the
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm
of the war that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the
of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock,
of this delicious Russian tea,” Lorrain was saying with an air of
of those rare women with whom a man’s honor is safe; but, O God, what
of you.”
“Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I’ve mixed everything up. One
“Oh, don’t speak of his going, don’t! I won’t hear it spoken
“Oh, don’t speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don’t understand
“Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!” exclaimed the mother.
“Oh, he is in a dreadful state,” said the mother to her son when
“Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?”
“Oh, how nice,” thought Natásha; and when Sónya and Nicholas had
“Oh, little countess!” ... and the count began bustling to get out
“Oh no, not at all too young!” replied the count. “Why, our
“Oh! Oh!” exclaimed several voices.
“Oh! Oh! Oh!” he muttered, looking down from the window at the
“Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so
old age and tobacco, which she had known so long. “Now, madam, these
old Count Bezúkhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses
older visitors. They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long,
oldest rose. Márya Dmítrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,
old father, and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a
old man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tíkhon
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and
on a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other,
on a hot dish.
on all sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
once been in to see the count. He has not sent for me.... I am sorry for
Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies’ at the one end
on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversation was on the chief
one another.
“One can’t everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have
one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so
one feels as if one were in the country.”
one had put but which was always in her mind, “and how much suffering,
“One must admit,” continued Prince Andrew, “that Napoleon as a man
one of the guests. “The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur,” said she
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
one pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sónya was
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly,
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
one would have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it
on her lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas’ animation
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
on himself. He could remain silent for hours without being at all put
on his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to
on in his usual tone of indifference.
onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gay
only by the elite.
“Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from
“On my honor!”
on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre
on the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because
on the arm said:
on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
“On the contrary,” replied the prince, who had plainly become
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess
on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
on the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind
on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
opinion,” said she, turning to the young man who, having come quite
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am.” And
opportunity to express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.
opposite. Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite to
order to make Borís’ better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,
Orlóv never gave such a dinner as ours will be!”
or Prince Vasíli. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know
or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at any
other.”
other before the service was concluded. Pierre paid no more attention
other lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte’s social tact in so agreeably
other’s hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began
others. “Well, you old sinner,” she went on, turning to the count
other young ladies in begging Natásha and Nicholas, who were noted for
ought to know where they are, and must find them, because...”
“Oui, madame,” replied he, looking around him.
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
our turn next.”
out:
out about him.
out as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a
out everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
out her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband’s waistcoat.
out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as
out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
over,” Anna Pávlovna continued. “The sovereigns will not be able to
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
“overflowing with amiability. His position has not turned his head
over his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering
owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas
“Papa,” said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,
“Papa, we shall be late,” said Princess Hélène, turning her
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve’s name.
part. Anna Pávlovna Schérer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
particular emphasis as if in it lay the gist of the matter.
particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a
particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was
particularly on the word possible... “as po-o-ossible,” he ended,
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober
passed out by a back door, but returned to their places one after the
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to
pathetic smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostóv deserved this
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
paused. “I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit
Pávlovna.
Pávlovna: “Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me
Pávlovna had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering
Pávlovna, looking up pensively.
Pávlovna’s hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. “Arrange
Pávlovna’s hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
Pávlovna’s was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all
peace. The old man was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was
pearls on their bare shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
people and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of
“People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to
people,” he went on, turning to Anna Pávlovna, “he ever was a hero,
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
“Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been
“Perhaps the count did not ask for me,” said Pierre when he reached
“Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pávlovna, did however
Petersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
Petersburg. Anna Mikháylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face,
Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
Petersburg—no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre
Petersburg on the tenth of August, and her son, who had remained in
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son.
Pétya! Good man!” cried he, addressing Pierre.
pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible”... he dwelt
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
Pierre.
Pierre.
Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself in
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbé as tutor,
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at
Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on his
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the
Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now been
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
Pierre heard her say:
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),
Pierre. It seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed.
Pierre listened to the colonel’s speech and nodded approvingly.
Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naïve surprise, now at him and
Pierre looked questioningly at Anna Mikháylovna to see what he was to
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as
“Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew’s study like
Pierre rose to help him.
Pierre rubbed his forehead.
Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natásha was perfectly happy;
Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
Pierre saw that Borís wished to change the subject, and being of the
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with
Pierre’s eyes.
Pierre’s hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He
“Pierre!” she said.
Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.
Pierre’s legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the
Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion’s
Pierre’s mind was in such a confused state that the word “stroke”
Pierre’s outburst Anna Pávlovna, despite her social experience, was
Pierre’s remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna Pávlovna’s
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in
Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
Pierre, was only busy causing him annoyance.
Pierre was silent.
Pierre was sitting in the drawing room where Shinshín had engaged him,
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasíli Kurágin’s and sharing the
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge
Pierre was very fond of.
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
Pierre well remembered this small circular drawing room with its mirrors
Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed
Pierre went out.
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
Pierre, who was lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band
pity for me. Why is it?”
place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn’t
placed a chair for her.
placed them on the window sill, though it was already quite light.
places. Then the strains of the count’s household band were replaced
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,
plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her
plan chimerical.
playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should.
pleasant smile, as if it were obvious to him that his success must
pleased to take me as an aide-de-camp....”
pleased with.
pleasure and listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he
pleasure to herself and to all around her. “I have brought my work,”
pointing to Nicholas, “his friend Borís has become an officer, and
police tried to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied
politeness and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
poorer than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
portfolio.
portfolio, and changed her grip.
portfolio she held in her hand. “All I know is that his real will is
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if
position is now a terrible one,” continued Anna Mikháylovna, sadly,
position now, Peter Nikoláevich...”
possessor of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince
possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
Posting Date: January 10, 2009 [EBook #2600]
power.”
powerful nation like Russia—barbaric as she is said to be—to place
prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
pregnant,” said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his
prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pávlovna, who had kept a
present I am free and am all right. Only I haven’t the least idea what
present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted
preserved all that was good in it—equality of citizenship and freedom
pretense of helping, was in everyone’s way.
pretext. The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladímirovich,
prevented her from going on with it.
pride. “That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those
priests; “all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young
prince.
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pávlovna straight in the face with a
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre’s childish words.
Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
Prince Andrew’s calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began—at first
Prince Andrew smiled.
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no
“Prince, humanum est errare, * but...” replied the doctor,
prince, she prepared to listen.
prince’s household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andréevich
princess and Prince Vasíli, recovering themselves, followed her. A few
princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
Princess Anna Mikháylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently
“Princess Drubetskáya to see Prince Vasíli Sergéevich,” he called
“Princesse, au revoir,” cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well
princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
princesses spent most of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom
princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. “Let us go.”
princess’ face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
Princess Hélène, Prince Vasíli’s daughter, and the little Princess
Princess. I am at your command.’ Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very
“Princess, I must warn you,” she added, lowering her voice and
princess, looking at Anna Mikháylovna as at a stranger.
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes—the look
princess’ room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for)
princess rose. “It’s now two o’clock and you dine at four. There
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
princess, turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatter
princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to
princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
princess with the expression women assume when they suppose they are
prince to get up, Tíkhon came to call the young prince to his father.
Prince Vasíli always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale
Prince Vasíli and the eldest princess were sitting close together
“Prince Vasíli arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on
Prince Vasíli became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikháylovna saw that
Prince Vasíli bent his head and spread out his hands.
Prince Vasíli came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was
Prince Vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
Prince Vasíli kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskáya
Prince Vasíli looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make
Prince Vasíli rose. “Oh!” said he with reproach and surprise,
Prince Vasíli said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously,
Prince Vasíli saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes
Prince Vasíli’s daughter, the beautiful Hélène, came to take her
Prince Vasíli’s face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
Prince Vasíli smiled.
“Prince Vasíli’s son, he, and a certain Dólokhov have, it is said,
Prince Vasíli stared at her and at Borís questioningly and perplexed.
Prince Vasíli was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude,
Prince Vasíli wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders,
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pávlovna, at once adopted just
progress. Would you believe it, I have literally not a penny and don’t
prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it
promotion...”
proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
proverb says,” remarked Shinshín, moving his pipe to the other side
P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.
pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.
pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Márya Dmítrievna
put a little aside and to send something to my father,” he went on,
put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The
put it off. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepare him!...
queer,” he added after a pause, “that you should have suspected
questions of health, sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but
quick.
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
quietly and said in a whisper: “Please walk in.”
quilt. The eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience. He made an
quite astonishing. How did you get things settled? I couldn’t possibly
quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful...”
quite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are
quite remember how, but don’t you remember that it could all be
“Quite right,” said the Englishman.
quite true; he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in
“Quite well? All right then, sit down.” He took the exercise book
quivering in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
raising his soft foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling
rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna
rank—“I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She
rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre’s terror-stricken
rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards’ barracks, in which
“Read this if you like, Father,” said the princess, blushing still
ready to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
really all the same to me when my son’s fate is at stake.” The
really...” But he did not say what “it really” was. “For the
“Really, I don’t yet know. I don’t like either the one or the
“Really, truly!” answered Natásha, pushing in a crisp lock that had
real state of French public opinion.”
reason of her friend’s sorrow, “I’m sure Véra has said something
reasons for Buonaparte’s hatred of him.
received by the Emperor. Had you heard?”
received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
reception.
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezúkhov and
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
recruiting. None of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew’s sister.
regarding him with a smile of approbation.
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality—these are
regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of
rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek
relays.
remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on
remarked. “Well, sit down: let’s have a talk.”
remarks at him, though without looking at him.
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
remember how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting
“Remember that you will answer for the consequences,” said Prince
repeated from the opening words of the manifesto:
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
replied, “and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow
replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in the
replied Borís, betraying neither annoyance at the prince’s brusque
replied Prince Vasíli.
reply.
reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
representative but one of the great century, and that it is his own
rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbé about
resolute in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly
resolved not to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till
respected and feared her.
respectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half an
responsibility of that deed.”
rest, and then...”
rested on Prince Andrew’s face.
restrained animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese
restraining her angry tears.
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
returned to Moscow and went straight to her rich relations, the
returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen.
returning his smile.
returning to his hobby; “tell me how the Germans have taught you to
return to her the whole evening.
revoir! ”—and she left the hall.
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
rich?”
rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great
right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natásha.
right hand, which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust
right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but—I do not
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will
right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything—that’s what
rights of man, is sentenced to...” But before Pierre—who at that
ring, cried from the window: “Come here; part the bets!” This was
rite which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound
rolled softly over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikháylovna,
rolling them up. Márya Dmítrievna always spoke in Russian.
room after supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don’t
room. All were silent.
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
room,” he said.
room. The countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o’clock, as the
room with the inkstand in her hand.
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
rose from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it,” he
Rostóvs, with whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
round an open window. Three others were romping with a young bear, one
round Márya Dmítrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until,
round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
“Rousseau’s Contrat Social,” said the vicomte with a tolerant
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady’s old
royalist emigrant.
rubbing his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little
rubles a year? And,” he went on after a pause, “what will it be in
rubles, Dólokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a
rum without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
Running into Sónya’s room and not finding her there, Natásha ran to
running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl
rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
rush to obey the summons. “Send Dmítri to me!”
sacrament, allow him a moment’s peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your
sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
sacrificed everything for his sake!” she cried. “It’s splendid!
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
sad voice, as if saying: “Very well, finish me off.”
said:
said he.
said it, and they all felt awkward.
said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
said she, uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, “I
said Shinshín, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian
said the countess. “But I am in great need of this sum.”
said: “Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see
said the princess, ignoring his question. “Now I know! Yes; if I have
said to her, went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf.
sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret.
same?”
same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As
same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the
same!” Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort, nullifying
same state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.
same time felt shy.
same. You’ll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting
sang the quartette, “The Brook,” with which everyone was delighted.
sarcastic smile.
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining.
Saviour’s words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the
saw—covered to the waist by a bright green quilt—the familiar,
saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, “Opinions are
saying.
saying something witty and stinging.
saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle
say that there are only two sources of human vice—idleness and
Schérer.”
Schérer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Márya Fëdorovna.
“Schubert, the colonel of the Pávlograd Hussars, is dining with us
scratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
search of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He
seat.
    SECOND EPILOGUE
sedate, and the naïveté of his youthful egotism was so obvious, that
see his face. Anna Mikháylovna left him, and when she returned he was
see how these nestlings are growing up,” and she pointed to the girls.
Seeing Anna Mikháylovna and her son, Prince Vasíli dismissed the
seem.
seemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
seen him since we acted together at the Rumyántsovs’ theatricals. I
seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle
see whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. “The
self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and
self-confident French; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in
self-satisfied.
self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
“Semën! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?”
sentiments,” he seemed to be saying, “so much the worse for you!”
sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King
sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostóv’s was true.
sent you. Religious! I don’t interfere with anyone’s belief... I
separately through his thin compressed lips, “I will throw him down
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
servants say in a frightened whisper. “Catch hold from underneath.
service. A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding
settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round
“Settled!” replied Borís.
set without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women.... If you only
severity. The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could
shadow of the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
she added hurriedly. “No, don’t be angry, but promise! I have asked
she added, turning to her hostess. “You wrote that it was to be quite
She brought into Princess Mary’s strenuous, mournful, and gloomy
she came up fearless and gay to kiss her hand. “I know she’s a scamp
She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and
she faltered. “You are on good terms with Michael Ilariónovich
She gave her companion an angry glance.
She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.
She had been married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did
she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to
she had first entered the room—the smile of a perfectly beautiful
she had just vacated. “You have made the place warm, I must say,” he
she had learned it) she talked with her partner, fanning herself and
she had spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly
She has a brother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately.
She hurriedly ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to
she moved toward Anna Pávlovna. Hélène was so lovely that not only
she must be on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage was
“She needs rest,” said Prince Andrew with a frown. “Don’t you,
She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.
She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth
“She said.... Oh yes! She said, ‘Girl,’ to the maid, ‘put on a
she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to
She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge reticule and,
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining
She tried to pass Anna Mikháylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar
She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardly keep
She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut
she understood all the gravity of her friend’s trouble.
(She used the word “diplomat,” which was just then much in vogue
she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She was
“She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and
“She will go to the country.”
Shinshín, a cousin of the countess’, a man with “a sharp tongue”
Shinshín. “He has stopped Austria’s cackle and I fear it will be
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure
shoulder and taking his feet off the sofa.
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
shoulders. Anna Mikháylovna with just the same movement raised her
shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by
should get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even
showed a paper she held in her hand—with the verses Nicholas had
showed greatness of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
show her over, and they’ll talk nineteen to the dozen. That’s
“Shut up!” cried Dólokhov, pushing him away from the window. The
sick man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony
side (only now did Pierre realize how near death his father was), and
sighed. “I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
     Sighing its message out to thee...
sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
significantly at her husband) “I’m afraid, I’m afraid!” she
sign of strength.
silence at Princess Anna Mikháylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
silent.
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and every morning
silken hangings. On leaving the bed both Prince Vasíli and the princess
sill, leaned over, and looked down.
sill. “Listen!” cried he, standing there and addressing those in the
sill to attract attention. “Wait a bit, Kurágin. Listen! If
simply looking at him.
since his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in
sir, for shame! It would be better if you went to the war.”
sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on
sister-in-law’s friendship for you. She was not expecting us?”
sister’s, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
sister,” was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
sister with the mole.
sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre
sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the
sitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he
sitting here in almost the same positions as before, whispering to one
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.
sitting noisily backward and forward, made efforts to control himself
sitting room.
sitting so for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened
sixth stroke. The doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute
sleeves!” said Anna Mikháylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out.
slender little girl.
slightly sarcastic smile. “I am Borís, son of Princess Anna
small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray
smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but
smile.
smile.
smile.
smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,
smiling at his reassuring thoughts.
smiling, but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes
smiling. “Cela nous convient à merveille.*(2) Suvórov now—he knew
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
smilingly inclining his head.
smiling over the fan.
smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. This was an old bachelor,
smoking and talking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head
smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
snuffbox with her husband’s portrait on it.
so beautiful that very often in spite of the plainness of her face
so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you
society.
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
so convulsively that her bare little shoulders shook. Natásha’s
so delighted...” came the sounds of animated feminine voices,
so for friendship’s sake he is leaving the university and me, his
soft steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
so ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from
“So it does,” thought Pierre.
So it seems to me.”
solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.
some inspection business,” remarked the visitor.
some in the sitting room, some in the library.
some men who, carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots
someone rich and distinguée, and it is on you that his relations’
something as she whispered:
something disconcerting to himself.
something like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was
something to drink?”
Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the
son.”
son, Ilyá? Only fancy, I didn’t know you at first. Do you remember
son’s affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg.”
son’s arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while
son; Sónya, the count’s fifteen-year-old niece, and little Pétya,
son’s when speaking to him that afternoon, “believe me I suffer no
Sónya and fat little Pétya doubled up with laughter.
Sónya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in
Sónya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natásha, not stirring
“Sónya, don’t believe her, darling! Don’t believe her! Do you
Sónya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it
Sónya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the
“Sónya,” she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true
Sónya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and
“Sónya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are
“Sónya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!” And
“Sónya, what is the matter with you? How can you?” said he, running
soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were
soon as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk
sooner?”
“Só-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,
Sophie—I can’t repeat them—that it made the count quite ill and he
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
sorrowful, and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of
      * So that squares matters.
so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
soul to see such men as the old count and his worthy son,” said she.
sounded still more firm and resolute.
sound of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who
sound of that sentence: “Contez nous çela, Vicomte.”
“Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone
“So you are really going to the war, Andrew?” she said sighing.
So young, and burdened with such riches—to what temptations he will be
speaking of Berg as her “intended.” The count sat between them and
speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
speaking very gently.
specially amiable mood that day.
specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in
spend time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander’s
spite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite
spoil her, but really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I
spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
spot” (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbé’s
spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air
spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray
spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as
stairs and up another, to Pierre’s rooms.
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
start my apprenticeship as old maid.”
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***
staying the whole evening, I hope?”
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
steps.
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
stern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed
sternly with a threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
still gazed at the spot where Pierre’s face had been before he sat
still in the drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily
Still, I will take Borís and go to see him at once, and I shall speak
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her
still sound, yellowish teeth.
“Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise...” said the
stir around him, then the people resumed their places and the service
stones of the pavement.
stood waiting by the door.
stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,
stouter!...”
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant
straw covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril
strayed from under her friend’s plaits.
(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
subject, and was thus at the duc’s mercy. The latter spared him, and
subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
succeeded in setting two loquacious talkers at one another.
such bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill
Suddenly Dólokhov made a backward movement with his spine, and his arm
suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess’ pretty
suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasíli
suggestion and pressed his lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither
sumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front
superstition, and only two virtues—activity and intelligence. He
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
“Surely he will leave something to Borís,” said the countess.
surprise.”
surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if
swallowing his r’s, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French
sweeter, and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
symmetrically on his knees in the naïve attitude of an Egyptian statue,
table.
table and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: “what if
table linen, he would call Dmítri Vasílevich, a man of good family and
table that he had pushed away. “But... in short, the fact is... you
table. “What are you thumping the table for?” she demanded of the
“Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar,”
take a seat beside her.
“Take it right out, or they’ll think I’m holding on,” said
take part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and saw
taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
taking a letter addressed in a woman’s hand from a bag hanging above
taking leave of Anna Pávlovna. “It is settled,” she added in a low
talking about me? Let us talk about you,” he added after a silence,
talking. Seeing them pass, Prince Vasíli drew back with obvious
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbé, so she hurried to the
taste. And she had a lady’s maid, also big. She said....”
teacher’s fault or the pupil’s, this same thing happened every day:
tears.”
tell me,” he added with studied carelessness as if it had only just
“Tell me, my dear,” said she to Natásha, “is Mimi a relation of
tell you for the tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns
tenderly sad voice, she said:
terrible and holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh
terrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for
terribly true. I pity Prince Vasíli but am still more sorry for Pierre.
“Thank God,” said his son smiling.
than with politics,” said he in his quiet ironical tone. “I know
“That abbé is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the
that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe
that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don’t believe a
that Anna Mikháylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
that evening to bid a last farewell to the celebrated grandee of
that everything was splendid. “Just fancy: wants to be an hussar.
that friendship?” remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
that he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that his
“that here lives Count Cyril Vladímirovich Bezúkhov so rich, all
that his remarks were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and
that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one
“That is all nonsense.” Prince Andrew again interrupted him, “let
“That is doubtful,” said Prince Andrew. “Monsieur le Vicomte quite
that is not yet ready.
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
“That is, with Ilyá Rostóv who married Nataly Shinshiná,” said
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with
that I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry
“that letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew
that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray
“That’s fine,” said he.
that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in
that showed that his father’s foibles did not prevent his son from
“That’s how we used to dance in our time, ma chère,” said the
that’s it.” And with a complacent sigh he would return to the
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre’s face.
“That’s not the point, my dear.”
that stood before his plate, Pierre held out one at random and drank
“That’s true!”
“That’s what comes of a modern education,” exclaimed the visitor.
that’s why I have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him,
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
that they may run smoothly.
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful
“That was a Daniel Cooper!” exclaimed Márya Dmítrievna, tucking up
   That while her fingers touch the harp
“That would be a fine thing!” said she. “I never wanted anything
the 18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not
the abbé. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful
The Abbé Morio and many others had also come.
the advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own
the agility with which he capered about on his light feet, Márya
the anteroom. “I can’t remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what
the army, and about whom Natásha had teased her elder sister Véra,
the army was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
the baron.
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyone
“‘The Brook,’” suggested Nicholas.
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the
the carved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose,
The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was
the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
the climate,” said he.
The colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared
The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted to
the company commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company,
the conversation, “almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last
The conversation was hushed.
The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshín
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not
the count, dying with laughter.
the countess as her mother and called her so) “that I am spoiling
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikháylovna. The latter
The countess’ eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.
The countess tried to frown, but could not. Márya Dmítrievna shook her
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
The countess was upset by her friend’s sorrow and humiliating poverty,
the countess, with a smile.
The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from
“The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide
the count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile
the count was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always
The count went in first with Márya Dmítrievna, the countess followed
the crystal decanters and fruit vases, the count kept glancing at his
“The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his
The doctor glanced at his watch.
the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer
the drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, but
the duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskáya, belonging to one of the
The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karágina turned to
The eldest princess paused in her reading and silently stared at him
the Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death—and he is
“The Emperor Alexander,” said she, with the melancholy which
the Emperor spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I were speaking of
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.
The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use.
the Epistles and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries
“The execution of the Duc d’Enghien,” declared Monsieur Pierre,
the exercise book containing geometrical figures.
the expression she saw on the maid of honor’s face, and again relapsed
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: “Yes,
“The fact of the matter is,” said she significantly, and also in a
(the family solicitor) “and he says the same.”
the feather bed. Natásha began consoling her, but her face showed that
the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant
The first door on the left led into the princesses’ apartments. The
the first time. Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre, and that funny
the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre
the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking
the gates, a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up,
the gentlemen around.
the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair
the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of
the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for
the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.
the guests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity
the hall porter, “I know Count Cyril Vladímirovich is very ill...
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turned
the hand nor a single muscle of the count’s face stirred. Once more
The handsome Véra smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.
The handsome Véra, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant
the head that he was considering this information.
the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of
“The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and
the hussars.”
the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.
the icons, as though declaring to all that she could not answer for
the intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a
their doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for
their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
their musical talent, to sing something. Natásha, who was treated as
their own form of government; and I believe that once free from the
their seats, went up to “congratulate” the countess, and reached
their woman’s way! I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About
the kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pávlovna served up to
the landing. “I’d better go to my own room.”
The large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted
the last syllable of the general’s name like a Frenchman, “has been
the late Emperor, and was nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He is
the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and
the letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him
“The limits of human life ... are fixed and may not be
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Hélène.
The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes
the little princess, kissing her. “I know you already through my
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up
the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
the manager of all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the
them. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed
“The means are ... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of
the men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing
The Military Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is
them off, inviting them all to dinner.
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
the morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
the morning she told the Rostóvs and all her acquaintances the details
     * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
then....”
the nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one’s head whirl! It is as
then believe an expert. I have just been talking to Dmítri Onúfrich”
The news of Count Bezúkhov’s death reached us before your letter
“Then it is certain?” said the prince.
then named Prince Vasíli in an inquiring whisper, then pointed to the
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God will
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs
then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vasíli’s arm more tightly.
“Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?”
the nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.
the nursery, but Sónya was not there either. Natásha concluded that
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
the other side of the room. “How young-looking he is!”
the other—who with beaming faces had come to see their master making
the pathetic importance of these last moments of meeting between the
the people,” the abbé was saying. “It is only necessary for one
the place of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostóv
the pleasure of spending the evening with you.”
the portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily.
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte
the Povarskáya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself and
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
the prim visitor could not help joining in.
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
the princess.
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.
The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the same
The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the
the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
the princess’ eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear
The princess gave a wrong answer.
The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as
The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony
The princess let go.
The princess listened, smiling.
The princess looked in a scared way at her father’s eyes glittering
the princess, now quite changed. “And what does she come worming
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which
The princess started. Evidently Pierre’s words touched her to the
The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for her
The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She
the prince sternly; “I’m afraid you write much nonsense. I’ll read
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
the prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house
The Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy
there.”
there.
there any hope?”
there are no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin...
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it
the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently
there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
“There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must
“There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup
“There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin,” she
“There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was
“There, leave Bruin alone; here’s a bet on.”
“There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?” said he to
there. Now then!”
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking
there was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasíli and the
“There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
The rustle of a woman’s dress was heard in the next room. Prince
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
the scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red
These latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a
these poignant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are
these rooms. Anna Mikháylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshín’s remark.
these things. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for
These words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants
the sky, the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
the sly what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of
the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house
The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.
the son, or Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he
“The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia,” said the vicomte, polite
the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and
the spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father’s favorite
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point
the table, onto which he threw it.
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,
the third!”
The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pávlovna.
“The third, I said the third!” cried the prince abruptly, pushing
the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening
the two ladies, addressing Prince Vasíli and pointing to an inlaid
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
“The unpleasant things were said to me,” remarked Véra, “I said
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
“The vicomte knew the duc personally,” whispered Anna Pávlovna to
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
the vicomte’s story. Prince Vasíli’s words frightened her, an
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it
The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
the well-known Prince Bolkónski who had to retire from the army under
the whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career,” said
the will and letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition
“The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it.”
the window sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered
“They are regular brigands, especially Dólokhov,” replied the
they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide
they contain; for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.
They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the
they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the
“They give little hope,” replied the prince.
they had lifted the dying man and were moving him.
they had when she was not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her
they’ll say so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My
they must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated,
The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish
the young man had departed. “There is never any ‘impossible’ with
“The young man’s a real hussar!” shouted the colonel, again
The young people, at the countess’ instigation, gathered round the
The young Princess Bolkónskaya had brought some work in a
“They say the ball will be very good,” replied the princess, drawing
They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who
they too could, like Natásha and Borís, escape from the drawing room.
“They’ve been saying so a long while,” said the count, “and
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound
they were in the carriage. “He hardly recognizes anybody.”
thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on
thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which
thing can be arranged. It shall be on your family’s behalf that I’ll
thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
things and supper dishes stood in disorder, and in the middle of the
things, but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly
things. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
things that he has been expelled by the police.”
thinking of?” she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. “Fetch me my
Think that he is your father ... perhaps in the agony of death.” She
“Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen,” she counted on her slender
thirteen look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for
thirty,” said he, looking at Shinshín and the count with a joyful,
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life—with
This Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the old
this fact ought to give Prince Vasíli much satisfaction.
this he’ll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?” And he
“this is absurd! Come, let go I tell you.”
“This is for Borís from me, for his outfit.”
“This is what I want, my dear fellow,” said the count to the
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of
this reinforcement.
this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his
this same room was dimly lighted by two candles. On one small table tea
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of
This was the count’s favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.
“This won’t do, Princess; it won’t do,” said he, when Princess
this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were
those Kurágins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so
“Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most
those who were guiding him.
those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous
those women—mostly mothers—who, having once made up their minds,
though embracing her.
though he may perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will...”
though politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman
though she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
thought independent of her sister-in-law’s words. In the midst of a
thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
thought, “seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such
thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.
Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages—twenty
through the door.
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
thumping the table.
thumping the table; “and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill
Tíkhon, at her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.
Tíkhon knew that neither the son’s arrival nor any other unusual
till she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
till the general asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and
till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of,
time, Anna Mikháylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
times repeated—of a sonata by Dussek.
times, the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid
time to time he went out to ask: “Hasn’t she come yet?” They
tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but
tiresome,” said Natásha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly.
Title: War and Peace
to accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the
to a footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat,
to another. “How evidently he belongs to the best society,” said she
to a third; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest
to a tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired
to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
to be all right,” Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikháylovna.
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikháylovna who was
to behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that
to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from
to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.
“Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations
to dinner. I suppose he won’t go?” she continued, turning to the
to distraction! One learns many things then,” she added with a certain
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
to drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he
To each new arrival Anna Pávlovna said, “You have not yet seen my
     * To err is human.
to fathom what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will
   To feel that in this world there’s one
to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?” she
to go by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikháylovna’s air
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As
to her? I am so grateful to you that I would willingly sacrifice
to him, as you so well know how to be.”
to him straight out. Let people think what they will of me, it’s
to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of
to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezúkhov and the
to Kutúzov’s staff despite all Anna Mikháylovna’s endeavors and
told the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about
to make out the pattern.
to make scenes. This last consideration moved him.
to me all about it, and I will help you in everything.” Pierre had
tone and manner, here in Moscow to Anna Mikháylovna whom he had placed
tone of voice. “Come here, my friend...” and she ominously tucked
tone. “What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
“Tonight, not later,” said he in a low voice, and he moved away
took up her work.
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around—all indicated
too, might have their own interests. But all he said was so prettily
to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count’s hand
too seemed strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the
to Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
topic—making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly
topic of the day: the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of
To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze
“To Prince Vasíli. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything,
to run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching—as
to seize hold of Dólokhov’s shirt.
to show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and
to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
to take their leave.
to tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
to the back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.
to the effect that the Duc d’Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to
to the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
to the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
to the Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre’s glass while
to the last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she
to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political
to the visitor she added: “She is my youngest girl.”
to the window.
to think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him. He
to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on, having made up his
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
to turn the count’s heavy body toward the wall.
to twitch. The twitching increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one
touched him was sent flying.
touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre’s beaming face he gave him an
touch, “you promised me!”
toward him whom He may give me for husband.
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikháylovna had
to warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge
to you since dinner? Hasn’t she?”
Translators: Louise and Aylmer Maude
trembled nervously; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip
triangles are equal; please note that the angle ABC...”
“Trust in His mercy!” and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit
trying through the Dowager Empress Márya Fëdorovna to secure it for
trying to get something out of the rich man?”
“Try to serve well and show yourself worthy,” added he, addressing
turned out splendidly all the same,” he added, winking at Véra.
turned to Anna Mikháylovna, answering her query by a movement of the
turned to her.
turned to his wife.
turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Hélène.
turned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,
turning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention.
turning his partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas,
turn now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
turn spindles at home!’?” said Shinshín, puckering his brows and
Two footmen, the princess’ and his own, stood holding a shawl and
“Two such charming children. And really you appreciate them less than
two younger ones were embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they
unable to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But
un bâtard!”* she added, as if supposing that this translation of the
unchanging smile.
unchanging stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the
under an invisible cap—to see what went on in the world. She was
under an obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he
understand?”
understand and state the patient’s condition.
understand him, but he did not speak it very well—“I bet fifty
understand him it was so much the worse for them—did not go up to the
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual
understand it; I don’t in the least understand why men can’t live
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for
understand... what a soul he has!”
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
understood without naming.
uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too,
unpleasant.
unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let’s go to the
up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. “It is not from
up from both sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in
up from the sofa, seized Borís under the elbow in his quick, clumsy
up her downy little lip. “All the pretty women in society will be
up her sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a
upon anyone, and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to
upper lip and her half-open mouth—seemed to be her own special and
up to her.
up to their gallery, addressing the first violin:
us?...” “Ah! Mary, you have got thinner?...” “And you have grown
used to say that a nap “after dinner was silver—before dinner,
us talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?”
usual.
usurper, the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms
vacancies occur much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think
vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
varnish.
Vasíli.
Vasíli and the eldest princess. Pierre concluded that this also was
Vasíli, “but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should
Vasíli, his cheeks twitching more than ever.
Vasíli in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed
Vasíli, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
Vasíli played a very despicable part in this affair and that he
Vasíli severely. “You don’t know what you are doing.”
Vasíli’s son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to
Vasíli’s son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced.
Vasíli to Anna Mikháylovna. “Go and take something, my poor Anna
Vasíli to Anna Pávlovna.
Vasíli understood it as an expression of weariness.
Vasíli went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at
Vasíli, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
“Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!” said the colonel,
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly
“Véra,” she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a
Véra with guilty, happy faces.
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
very clever but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy.
very fine when he said that,” he remarked, repeating the words in
“Very interesting.”
“Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about....”
“Very lovely,” said Prince Andrew.
very poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that
“Very,” said Pierre.
very serious talk.”
“Very silly,” said Véra. “I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!”
very well...”
“Very well, very well...”
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which
vicomte who was continuing his story.
vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid.”
“Vile woman!” shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna
visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte,
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
visitor. “And to think it is Cyril Vladímirovich Bezúkhov’s son
visitor. “He is a son of Márya Ivánovna Dólokhova, such a worthy
visitors on his right. Midway down the long table on one side sat the
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov, Countess Rostóva sat for a long time all
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov. If he will not assist his godson—you know
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov’s house. “My dear Borís,” said the
Vladímirovich is my mother’s second cousin. He’s also my Bóry’s
voice.
volume you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since
vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell
     Wafting sweet music o’er the lea,
waistcoat. “It’s the sauté, most likely,” she added with a smile.
“Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here,” said Anatole, and
“Wait a bit, here’s a letter for you,” said the old man suddenly,
“Wait a moment, I’ll get my work.... Now then, what are you
“Wait!” cried Dólokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window
waited in expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral.
waiting for—some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
“Wait—just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards...”
walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
wants to go to the war,” replied Pierre, addressing the princess
“Wants to turn on the other side,” whispered the servant, and got up
want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful arms
WAR AND PEACE
war, even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature—which townsfolk
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
wars,” he said.
was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
was about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave
“was a political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon
was at home last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he
was charming... You are very kind... Countess Apráksina...” was heard
was coming, and turning to her mother:
was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen
was great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he
was holding fast to plait, would allow.
was in the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of
was necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
was standing beside the princess, and they were both speaking in excited
was stricter.”
was talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference,
was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate
was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone—the visitors
watched her cousin who was going to join the army, with such passionate
watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
“watching over his interests” meant, but he decided that all these
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
way, and, blushing far more than Borís, began to speak with a feeling
weak human understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to
weariness of tone, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you
weather, and Countess Apráksina. Now and then they glanced at one
weather. “The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow
“We don’t interfere with you and Berg.”
we had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
“We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal
weight they were carrying were too much for them.
we know where we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition?
we let our feeble human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who
welfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of a
well.”
well!” and he turned to go.
well and, in particular, drinks well. “So do come and dine with us!”
“Well, and to whom did you apply about Bóry?” asked the countess.
“Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?”
“Well done!... Fine fellow!... There’s a bet for you!... Devil take
well educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has
well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
“Well, how is he?”
“Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!”
“Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?” said Márya
well known, so much appreciated by everyone. The other day at the
“Well, let’s go and sing ‘The Brook.’”
“Well, little countess? What a sauté of game au madère we are to
“Well, madam,” he began, stooping over the book close to his
“Well, mon cher,” said the vicomte, having seated himself beside
“Well, my boy, you’ll get along wherever you go—foot or
“Well, my dear?” asked the countess.
“Well, my dear?” said Prince Vasíli, taking her hand and bending it
“Well now, isn’t she a fool!” shouted the prince, pushing the book
“Well, now you’ve done what you wanted,” put in Nicholas—“said
“Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
“Well, really, Catiche! Can’t you understand! You are so
“Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised
“Well,” said she, “how’s my Cossack?” (Márya Dmítrievna
“Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma...”
“Well, then, I won’t; only forgive me, Sónya!” He drew her to him
“Well, then, let’s be quick. Borís, come here,” said Natásha.
“Well, then, old chap, mon très honorable Alphonse Kárlovich,”
“Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know
“Well, why are you going to the war?” asked Pierre.
“Well, you see, Count, I want some money.”
“Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semënovna,”
“We may as well go back,” said the son in French.
went further in among the plants and threw down the doll. “Closer,
went into the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian
went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the
went on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines.
went, with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably
we parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
were being set out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who
were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask
were children. You might think that I... I understand, quite understand.
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
were expecting Márya Dmítrievna Akhrosímova, known in society as le
were, “high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does
were Nicholas and Sónya, the niece. Sónya was a slender little
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Borís
were sitting at embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the
were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why
were therefore awkward.
were to be severe with her and to forbid it ... goodness knows what they
“we shall be late.”
“We’ve got to it at last—why did you not tell me about it
“We will talk of it later,” said Anna Pávlovna with a smile.
We women, Prince,” and she smiled tenderly, “always know how to say
“What a charming creature your younger girl is,” said the visitor;
“What a delightful woman this little princess is!” said Prince
“What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!” shouted
“What a pity you weren’t at the Arkhárovs’ on Thursday. It was so
“What are you doing!” she cried vehemently. “He is dying and you
“What are you making such a noise about over there?” Márya
“What are your commands, little countess?”
“What a treasure that Dmítri is,” added the count with a smile when
what a voice she has; though she’s my daughter, I tell the truth
what can be done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to
“What can one say about it?” replied the prince in a cold, listless
“What for? I don’t know. I must. Besides that I am going....” He
“What have you done to Mlle Schérer? She will be quite ill now,”
what he was about; yet they beat him à plate couture,*(3) and where
“What is it?” asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her
“What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don’t understand,” said he.
“What is that?” asked the countess as if she did not know what the
“What is the matter with you, my dear?” she said crossly to the maid
“What is the something?” asked he.
“What manners! I thought they would never go,” said the countess,
“What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
“What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go
“What next?” the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not
“What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that...
“What shall we sing?” she said.
What’s one to do, my dear?”
“What’s the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too
what we fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours
“What will happen now?” thought she.
“What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he
“What would you have me do?” he said at last. “You know I did all
“What would you have, my dear fellow?” answered Pierre, shrugging
“What you said just now was splendid!” said his partner Julie.
When Anna Mikháylovna returned from Count Bezúkhov’s the money, all
“When are you starting?” he asked.
When Borís appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,
when he needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is
when I say she’ll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an
When Natásha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
when she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
when she had seen her guests out.
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasíli sat down all alone
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
“When would you like them, your excellency?” asked Dmítri. “Allow
where.
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in
which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed
which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us
which had lost all dignity, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince
which he found himself. Anna Pávlovna was obviously serving him up as
which indicates that patience is exhausted.
which intimated that he knew what he was about and if others did not
which it is difficult to justify.”
which several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music began
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
which showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he
which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
While in the Rostóvs’ ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced,
While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
while the youngest, the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and
whispered, and a shudder ran down her back.
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
whispering, and betraying by every word and movement that they none
whispers.
whispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man’s
who also enjoyed the famous actress’ favors, and that in his presence
who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding
who amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so
who, as they passed through in their ball dresses with diamonds and
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
who gives himself the airs of a monarch.”
who had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pávlovna,
who had him under observation, interrupted:
who had lolled in Anna Pávlovna’s easy chairs and with half-closed
who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Borís on the evening of
who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw
who kept her waiting some minutes. “Don’t you wish to serve me? Then
who kissed his hand.
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
whole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses
whole set. Yes, you’re all right! Choose what you will; it’s all the
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
whom did you apply?”
whom he had promised to take home.
whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sónya wore
whom I mention this, because I like you.”
who ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
“Who sacrificed everything for him,” chimed in the princess, who
     Who still is thinking but of thee!
who stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine
who was kissing her hand, “you’re feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay?
“Who was that? The Military Governor himself?” was being asked at
why.
“Why don’t you speak, cousin?” suddenly shrieked the princess so
“Why do you say this young man is so rich?” asked the countess,
“Why no, my dear fellow,” said the astonished narrator, shrugging
“Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?” exclaimed the little
“Why, this is a palace!” she said to her husband, looking around
wife and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and busily filled
will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men.”
will be my teacher...” And lowering his big arm he offered it to the
will certainly be granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate
will come!”
will in Pierre’s favor are among the count’s papers, then, my dear
will just be time.”
will not rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if
will they cross Pomerania?”
window and from Dólokhov’s back. Anatole stood erect with staring
window sill.
window sill, with a pale but radiant face.
windows opening into the conservatory, with its large bust and full
wine with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
wish?”
wished both to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man
wished to say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasíli and his
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
wishes; that is my only reason for being here. I came simply to help him
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying to
with a decanter on a tray as “my dear” and “my sweet,” asked
with a decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to
with a distressed face left the room to find Sónya.
with a friendly smile.
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
with a look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal
with an f, as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich
with a pleasant feeling that there was something à la Louis XV in the
with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not
with a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow
with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect—the shortness of her
with enjoyment, gazing with ever-increasing amiability at the other
with exaggerated politeness.
with frightened eyes; the second assumed precisely the same expression;
with gossip,” he continued. “Just now they are talking about you and
with grief, though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his
with her to the side of the room where stood the high bedstead with its
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
with his foot.
with his small hand.
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she
with lighted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the
“With my father and sister, remember,” said Prince Andrew gently.
with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
with one another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and
with one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so
without an inner struggle; “at such a moment as this one must think
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from
without wars. How is it that we women don’t want anything of the kind,
with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under
with Shinshín. Berg gave his arm to Véra. The smiling Julie Karágina
with So and-So,’ and then I take a cab and go myself two, three, or
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
with tender smiles was saying to Véra that love is not an earthly but
with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball.
with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sónya and the young
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshín and the other male
with the rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and
with the same expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the
With these words she greeted Prince Vasíli Kurágin, a man of high
with us.”
“With you I will be quite frank,” said Anna Mikháylovna. “There
with you. May I?” he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the
woman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere,
woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
women.”
women are when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them
women, ‘women and wine’ I don’t understand!”
wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
won’t go.”
“Won’t you come over to the other table?” suggested Anna
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian
word would effectively prove to Prince Vasíli the invalidity of his
work and study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew’s lack
workbag.”
work nearer to her.
world!”
world a quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill.
would again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, “though
would be transferred to the Guards at once?” said she.
would I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to
would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote this
“Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna
wringing her hands.
“Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
written, “still, I should not cry, but you can’t... no one can
XVII, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!” and he became
years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person),
years ... then I will ask for your hand.”
“Yes.”
“Yes, and even tomorrow,” replied her brother.
“Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizes
“Yes, a regular volcano,” said the count. “Takes after me! And
“Yes, but between ourselves,” said the princess, “that is a
“Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters...”
“Yes, Dmítri, clean ones, please,” said the countess, sighing
“Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is
“Yes, I am, but please don’t let us do like that.... In another four
“Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide,” again interjected an
“Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to
“Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
“Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect
“Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who’s there?” he called out
“Yes, indeed,” replied the princess with a sigh. “So he may have
“Yes, it is all very horrid,” interrupted Pierre, “very horrid.”
“Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him,”
“Yes, it’s from Julie,” replied the princess with a timid glance
“Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and
“Yes, I was brought up quite differently,” remarked the handsome
“Yes, just the same. Though I don’t know what your opinion will
“Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you.
“Yes, now you may be glad!” said she; “this is what you have
“Yes,” replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were
“Yes,” said the countess when the brightness these young people had
“Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others,
“Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters,” chimed in the count,
“Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready,” she answered,
“Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess.”
“Yes, yes, of course,” interrupted Prince Vasíli impatiently,
“Yes, yes, of course!” Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of
Yes! Yes! Yes! Don’t look at me with such surprise. If you marry
“Yes, you’re quite right,” continued the countess. “Till now I
yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
“You always manage to do things at the wrong time,” continued Véra.
“You are in love with me?” Natásha broke in.
“You are mistaken,” said Borís deliberately, with a bold and
“You are off to the war, Prince?” said Anna Pávlovna.
you at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
“You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like
you!” came from different sides.
“You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed
you cry, Sónya, dear love, darling Sónya!” and she kissed her and
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for
“You don’t say so!” replied the countess.
“You don’t understand why I say this,” he continued, “but it is
     * You expect to make an income out of the government.
“You give me your word of honor not to go?”
“You had better go.”
“You had better take care!” said the countess.
“You have a try, Hercules,” said he, turning to Pierre.
“You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it’s very
“You have not yet seen my husband?”
“You have only lately arrived?” the countess asked him.
“You know,” said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
you’ll like it,” and he patted her cheek. “It will drive all the
“You must excuse me, dear Vicomte,” said Prince Vasíli to the
“You must look for husbands for them whether you like it or not....”
“You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift,” said the
young ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
young ladies. “I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman
young lady visitor and the countess’ eldest daughter (who was four
young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
young man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezúkhov, a well-known
young Nicholas Rostóv, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
young Rostóv.
young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
“Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier,” said Prince Andrew.
your enchanting party,” said he, turning to Anna Pávlovna.
your father.”
your father is rich, I don’t regard myself as a relation of his, and
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it’s my
your greatest pleasure is to be unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with
your interests as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I
yours? A daughter, I suppose?”
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
“You see! I have asked,” whispered Natásha to her little brother
“You see, my dear... What’s that mess?” she said, pointing to his
“You see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas
you tell me that among some good things it contains others which our
youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.
youthfully glittering eyes.
“You think so?” rejoined Anna Pávlovna in order to say something
“You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave
You understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his
“You’ve grown older, Tíkhon,” he said in passing to the old man,
you want to make something out of your company?”
“You were meaning to go out, weren’t you, Mamma? Do you want the
you won’t ask!”
“You won’t ask,” Natásha’s little brother was saying; “I know
“Zat, my dear sir, is vy...” he concluded, drinking a tumbler of
zere’s an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar,
