accept     Accept or Reject jobs to a destination, such as a printer.
access     Check a user’s RWX permission for a file.
aclocal    GNU autoconf too
aconnect      ALSA sequencer connection manager.
acpi     Show information about the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface.
acpi_available     Check if ACPI functionality exists on the system.
acpid     Informs user-space programs about ACPI events.
addr2line     Used to convert addresses into file names and line numbers.
addresses     Formats for internet mail addresses.
agetty     An alternative Linux Getty
alias     Create an alias for Linux commands
alsactl     Access advanced controls for ALSA soundcard driver.
amidi     Perform read/write operation for ALSA RawMIDI ports.
amixer     Access CLI-based mixer for ALSA soundcard driver.
anacron     Used to run commands periodically.
aplay     Sound recorder and player for CLI.
aplaymidi     CLI utility used to play MIDI files.
apm     Show Advanced Power Management (APM) hardware info on older systems.
apmd     Used to handle events reported by APM BIOS drivers.
apropos     Shows the list of all man pages containing a specific keyword
apt     Advanced Package Tool, a package management system for Debian and derivatives.
apt-get     Command-line utility to install/remove/update packages based on APT system.
aptitude     Another utility to add/remove/upgrade packages based on the APT system.
ar     A utility to create/modify/extract from archives.
arch     Display print machine hardware name.
arecord     Just like aplay, it’s a sound recorder and player for ALSA soundcard driver.
arecordmidi     Record standard MIDI files.
arp     Used to make changes to the system’s ARP cache
as     A portable GNU assembler.
aspell     An interactive spell checker utility.
at     Used to schedule command execution at specified date & time, reading commands from an input file.
atd     Used to execute jobs queued by the at command.
atq     List a user’s pending jobs for the at command.
atrm     Delete jobs queued by the at command.
audiosend     Used to send an audio recording as an email.
aumix     An audio mixer utility.
autoconf     Generate configuration scripts from a TEMPLATE-FILE and send the output to standard output.
autoheader     Create a template header for configure.
automake     Creates GNU standards-compliant Makefiles from template files
autoreconf     Update generated configuration files.
autoscan     Generate a preliminary configure.in
autoupdate     Update a configure.in file to newer autoconf.
awk     Used to find and replace text in a file(s).
badblocks     Search a disk partition for bad sectors.
banner     Used to print characters as a poster.
basename     Used to display filenames with directoy or suffix.
bash     GNU Bourne-Again Shell.
batch     Used to run commands entered on a standard input.
bc     Access the GNU bc calculator utility.
bg     Send processes to the background.
biff     Notify about incoming mail and sender’s name on a system running comsat server.
bind     Used to attach a name to a socket.
bison     A GNU parser generator, compatible with yacc.
break     Used to exit from a loop (eg: for, while, select).
builtin     Used to run shell builtin commands, make custom functions for commands extending their functionality.
bzcmp     Used to call the cmp program for bzip2 compressed files.
bzdiff     Used to call the diff program for bzip2 compressed files.
bzgrep     Used to call grep for bzip2 compressed files.
bzip2     A block-sorting file compressor used to shrink given files.
bzless     Used to apply ‘less’ (show info one page at a time) to bzip2 compressed files.
bzmore     Used to apply ‘more’ (an inferior version of less) to bzip2 compressed files.
cal     Show calendar.
cardctl     Used to control PCMCIA sockets and select configuration schemes.
cardmgr     Keeps an eye on the added/removes sockets for PCMCIA devices.
case     Execute a command conditionally by matching a pattern.
cat     Used to concatenate files and print them on the screen.
cc     GNU C and C++ compiler.
cd     Used to change directory.
cdda2wav     Used to rip a CD-ROM and make WAV file.
cdparanoia     Record audio from CD more reliably using data-verification algorithms.
cdrdao     Used to write all the content specified to a file to a CD all at once.
cdrecord     Used to record data or audio compact discs.
cfdisk     Show or change the disk partition table.
chage     Used to change user password information.
chattr     Used to change file attributes.
chdir     Used to change active working directory.
chfn     Used to change real user name and information.
chgrp     Used to change group ownership for file.
chkconfig     Manage execution of runlevel services.
chmod     Change access permission for a file(s).
chown     Change the owner or group for a file.
chpasswd     Update password in a batch.
chroot     Run a command with root privileges.
chrt     Alter process attributed in real-time.
chsh     Switch login shell.
chvt     Change foreground virtual terminal.
cksum     Perform a CRC checksum for files.
clear     Used to clear the terminal window.
cmp     Compare two files (byte by byte).
col     Filter reverse (and half-reverse) line feeds from the input.
colcrt     Filter nroff output for CRT previewing.
colrm     Remove columns from the lines of a file.
column     A utility that formats its input into columns.
comm     Used to compare two sorted files line by line.
command     Used to execute a command with arguments ignoring shell function named command.
compress     Used to compress one or more file(s) and replacing the originals ones.
continue     Resume the next iteration of a loop.
cp     Copy contents of one file to another.
cpio     Copy files from and to archives.
cpp     GNU C language processor.
cron     A daemon to execute scheduled commands.
crond     Same work as cron.
crontab     Manage crontab files (containing schedules commands) for users.
csplit     Split a file into sections on the basis of context lines.
ctags     Make a list of functions and macro names defined in a programming source file.
cupsd     A scheduler for CUPS.
curl     Used to transfer data from or to a server using supported protocols.
cut     Used to remove sections from each line of a file(s).
cvs     Concurrent Versions System. Used to track file versions, allow storage/retrieval of previous versions, and enables multiple users to work on the same file.
date     Show system date and time.
dc     Desk calculator utility.
dd     Used to convert and copy a file, create disk clone, write disk headers, etc.
ddrescue     Used to recover data from a crashed partition.
deallocvt     Deallocates kernel memory for unused virtual consoles.
debugfs     File system debugger for ext2/ext3/ext4
declare     Used to declare variables and assign attributes.
depmod     Generate modules.dep and map files.
devdump     Interactively displays the contents of device or file system ISO.
df     Show disk usage.
diff     Used to compare files line by line.
diff3     Compare three files line by line.
dig     Domain Information Groper, a DNS lookup utility.
dir     List the contents of a directory.
dircolors     Set colors for ‘ls’ by altering the LS_COLORS environment variable.
dirname     Display pathname after removing the last slash and characters thereafter.
dirs     Show the list of remembered directories.
disable     Restrict access to a printer.
dlpsh     Interactive Desktop Link Protocol (DLP) shell for PalmOS.
dmesg     Examine and control the kernel ring buffer.
dnsdomainname     Show the DNS domain name of the system.
dnssec-keygen     Generate encrypted Secure DNS keys for a given domain name.
dnssec-makekeyset     Produce domain key set from one or more DNS security keys generated by dnssec-keygen.
dnssec-signkey     Sign a secure DNS keyset with key signatures specified in the list of key-identifiers.
dnssec-signzone     Sign a secure DNS zonefile with the signatures in the specified list of key-identifiers.
doexec     Used to run an executable with an arbitrary argv list provided.
domainname     Show or set the name of current NIS (Network Information Services) domain.
dosfsck     Check and repair MS-DOS file systems.
du     Show disk usage summary for a file(s).
dump     Backup utility for ext2/ext3 file systems.
dumpe2fs     Dump ext2/ext3/ext4 file systems.
dumpkeys     Show information about the keyboard driver’s current translation tables.
e2fsck     Used to check ext2/ext3/ext4 file systems.
e2image     Store important ext2/ext3/ext4 filesystem metadata to a file.
e2label     Show or change the label on an ext2/ext3/ext4 filesystem.
echo     Send input string(s) to standard output i.e. display text on the screen.
ed     GNU Ed – a line-oriented text editor.
edquota     Used to edit filesystem quotas using a text editor, such as vi.
egrep     Search and display text matching a pattern.
eject     Eject removable media.
elvtune     Used to set latency in the elevator algorithm used to schedule I/O activities for specified block devices.
emacs    Emacs text editor command line utility.
enable     Used to enable/disable shell builtin commands.
env     Run a command in a modified environment. Show/set/delete environment variables.
envsubst     Substitute environment variable values in shell format strings.
esd     Start the Enlightenment Sound Daemon (EsounD or esd). Enables multiple applications to access the same audio device simultaneously.
esd-config    Manage EsounD configuration.
esdcat     Use EsounD to send audio data from a specified file.
esdctl     EsounD control program.
esddsp     Used to reroute non-esd audio data to esd and control all the audio using esd.
esdmon     Used to copy the sound being sent to a device. Also, send it to a secondary device.
esdplay     Use EsounD system to play a file.
esdrec     Use EsounD to record audio to a specified file.
esdsample     Sample audio using esd.
etags     Used to create a list of functions and macros from a programming source file. These etags are used by emacs. For vi, use ctags.
ethtool     Used to query and control network driver and hardware settings.
eval     Used to evaluate multiple commands or arguments are once.
ex     Interactive command
exec     An interactive line-based text editor.
exit     Exit from the terminal.
expand     Convert tabs into spaces in a given file and show the output.
expect     An extension to the Tcl script, it’s used to automate interaction with other applications based on their expected output.
export     Used to set an environment variable.
expr     Evaluate expressions and display them on standard output.
factor     Display prime factors of specified integer numbers.
false     Do nothing, unsuccessfully. Exit with a status code indicating failure.
fc-cache     Make font information cache after scanning the directories.
fc-list     Show the list of available fonts.
fdformat     Do a low-level format on a floppy disk.
fdisk     Make changes to the disk partition table.
fetchmail     Fetch mail from mail servers and forward it to the local mail delivery system.
fg     Used to send a job to the foreground.
fgconsole     Display the number of the current virtual console.
fgrep     Display lines from a file(s) that match a specified string. A variant of grep.
file     Determine file type for a file.
find     Do a file search in a directory hierarchy.
finger     Display user data including the information listed in .plan and .project in each user’s home directory.
fingerd     Provides a network interface for the finger program.
flex     Generate programs that perform pattern-matching on text.
fmt     Used to convert text to a specified width by filling lines and removing new lines, displaying the output.
fold     Wrap input line to fit in a specified width.
for     Expand words and run commands for each one in the resultant list.
formail     Used to filter standard input into mailbox format.
format     Used to format disks.
free     Show free and used system memory.
fsck     Check and repair a Linux file system
ftp     File transfer protocol user interface.
ftpd     FTP server process.
function     Used to define function macros.
fuser     Find and kill a process accessing a file.
g++     Run the g++ compiler.
gawk     Used for pattern scanning and language processing. A GNU implementation of AWK language.
gcc     A C and C++ compiler by GNU.
gdb     A utility to debug programs and know about where it crashes.
getent     Shows entries from Name Service Switch Libraries for specified keys.
getkeycodes     Displays the kernel scancode-to-keycode mapping table.
getopts     A utility to parse positional parameters.
gpasswd     Allows an administrator to change group passwords.
gpg     Enables encryption and signing services as per the OpenPGP standard.
gpgsplit     Used to split an OpenPGP message into packets.
gpgv     Used to verify OpenPGP signatures.
gpm     It enables cut and paste functionality and a mouse server for the Linux console.
gprof     Shows call graph profile data.
grep     Searches input files for a given pattern and displays the relevant lines.
groff     Serves as the front-end of the groff document formatting system.
groffer     Displays groff files and man pages.
groupadd     Used to add a new user group.
groupdel     Used to remove a user group.
groupmod     Used to modify a group definition.
groups     Show the group(s) to which a user belongs.
grpck     Verifies the integrity of group files.
grpconv     Creates a gshadow file from a group or an already existing gshadow.
gs     Invokes Ghostscript, and interpreter and previewer for Adobe’s PostScript and PDF languages.
gunzip     A utility to compress/expand files.
gzexe     Used compress executable files in place and have them automatically uncompress and run at a later stage.
gzip     Same as gzip.
halt     Command used to half the machine.
hash     Shows the path for the commands executed in the shell.
hdparm     Show/configure parameters for SATA/IDE devices.
head     Shows first 10 lines from each specified file.
help     Display’s help for a built-in command.
hexdump     Shows specified file output in hexadecimal, octal, decimal, or ASCII format.
history     Shows the command history.
host     A utility to perform DNS lookups.
hostid     Shows host’s numeric ID in hexadecimal format.
hostname     Display/set the hostname of the system.
htdigest     Manage the user authentication file used by the Apache web server.
htop     An interactive process viewer for the command line.
hwclock     Show or configure the system’s hardware clock.
iconv     Convert text file from one encoding to another.
id     Show user and group information for a specified user.
if     Execute a command conditionally.
ifconfig     Used to configure network interfaces.
ifdown     Stops a network interface.
ifup     Starts a network interface.
imapd     An IMAP (Interactive Mail Access Protocol) server daemon.
import     Capture an X server screen and saves it as an image.
inetd     Extended internet services daemon, it starts the programs that provide internet services.
info     Used to read the documentation in Info format.
init     Systemd system and service manager.
insmod     A program that inserts a module into the Linux kernel.
install     Used to copy files to specified locations and set attributions during the install process.
iostat     Shows statistics for CPU, I/O devices, partitions, network filesystems.
ip     Display/manipulate routing, devices, policy, routing and tunnels.
ipcrm     Used to remove System V interprocess communication (IPC) objects and associated data structures.
ipcs     Show information on IPC facilities for which calling process has read access.
iptables     Administration tool for IPv4 packet filtering and NAT.
iptables-restore     Used to restore IP tables from data specified in the input or a file.
iptables-save     Used to dump IP table contents to standard output.
isodump     A utility that shows the content iso9660 images to verify the integrity of directory contents.
isoinfo     A utility to perform directory like listings of iso9660 images.
isosize     Show the length of an iso9660 filesystem contained in a specified file.
isovfy     Verifies the integrity of an iso9660 image.
ispell     A CLI-based spell-check utility.
jobs     Show the list of active jobs and their status.
join     For each pair of input lines, join them using a command field and display on standard output.
kbd_mode     Set a keyboard mode. Without arguments, shows the current keyboard mode.
kbdrate     Reset keyboard repeat rate and delay time.
kill     Send a kill (termination) signal to one more processes.
killall     Kills a process(es) running a specified command.
killall5     A SystemV killall command. Kills all the processes excluding the ones which it depends on.
klogd     Control and prioritize the kernel messages to be displayed on the console, and log them through syslogd.
kudzu     Used to detect new and enhanced hardware by comparing it with existing database. Only for RHEL and derivates.
last     Shows a list of recent logins on the system by fetching data from /var/log/wtmp file.
lastb     Shows the list of bad login attempts by fetching data from /var/log/btmp file.
lastlog     Displays information about the most recent login of all users or a specified user.
ld     The Unix linker, it combines archives and object files. It then puts them into one output file, resolving external references.
ldconfig     Configure dynamic linker run-time bindings.
ldd     Shows shared object dependencies.
less     Displays contents of a file one page at a time. It’s advanced than more command.
lesskey     Used to specify key bindings for less command.
let     Used to perform integer artithmetic on shell variables.
lftp     An FTP utility with extra features.
lftpget     Uses lftop to retrieve HTTP, FTP, and other protocol URLs supported by lftp.
link     Create links between two files. Similar to ln command.
ln     Create links between files. Links can be hard (two names for the same file) or soft (a shortcut of the first file).
loadkeys     Load keyboard translation tables.
local     Used to create function variables.
locale     Shows information about current or all locales.
locate     Used to find files by their name.
lockfile     Create semaphore file(s) which can be used to limit access to a file.
logger     Make entries in the system log.
login     Create a new session on the system.
logname     Shows the login name of the current user.
logout     Performs the logout operation by making changes to the utmp and wtmp files.
logrotate     Used for automatic rotation, compression, removal, and mailing of system log files.
look     Shows any lines in a file containing a given string in the beginning.
losetup     Set up and control loop devices.
lpadmin     Used to configure printer and class queues provided by CUPS (Common UNIX Printing System).
lpc     Line printer control program, it provides limited control over CUPS printer and class queues.
lpinfo     Shows the list of avaiable devices and drivers known to the CUPS server.
lpmove     Move on or more printing jobs to a new destination.
lpq     Shows current print queue status for a specified printer.
lpr     Used to submit files for printing.
lprint     Used to print a file.
lprintd     Used to abort a print job.
lprintq     List the print queue.
lprm     Cancel print jobs.
lpstat     Displays status information about current classes, jobs, and printers.
ls     Shows the list of files in the current directory.
lsattr     Shows file attributes on a Linux ext2 file system.
lsblk     Lists information about all available or the specified block devices.
lsmod     Show the status of modules in the Linux kernel.
lsof     List open files.
lspci     List all PCI devices.
lsusb     List USB devices.
m4     Macro processor.
mail     Utility to compose, receive, send, forward, and reply to emails.
mailq     Shows to list all emails queued for delivery (sendmail queue).
mailstats     Shows current mail statistics.
mailto     Used to send mail with multimedia content in MIME format.
make     Utility to maintain groups of programs, recompile them if needed.
makedbm     Creates an NIS (Network Information Services) database map.
makemap     Creates database maps used by the keyed map lookups in sendmail.
man     Shows manual pages for Linux commands.
manpath     Determine search path for manual pages.
mattrib     Used to change MS-DOS file attribute flags.
mbadblocks     Checks MD-DOS filesystems for bad blocks.
mcat     Dump raw disk image.
mcd     Used to change MS-DOS directory.
mcopy     Used to copy MS-DOS files from or to Unix.
md5sum     Used to check MD5 checksum for a file.
mdel, mdeltree     Used to delete MS-DOS file. mdeltree recursively deletes MS-DOS directory and its contents.
mdir     Used to display an MS-DOS directory.
mdu     Used to display the amount of space occupied by an MS-DOS directory.
merge     Three-way file merge. Includes all changes from file2 and file3 to file1.
mesg     Allow/disallow osends to sedn write messages to your terminal.
metamail    For sending and showing rich text or multimedia email using MIME typing metadata.
metasend      An interface for sending non-text mail.
mformat     Used to add an MS-DOS filesystem to a low-level formatted floppy disk.
mimencode     Translate to/from MIME multimedia mail encoding formats.
minfo     Display parameters of an MS-DOS filesystem.
mkdir     Used to create directories.
mkdosfs     Used to create an MS-DOS filesystem under Linux.
mke2fs     Used create an ext2/ext3/ext4 filesystem.
mkfifo     Used to create named pipes (FIFOs) with the given names.
mkfs     Used to build a Linux filesystem on a hard disk partition.
mkfs.ext3     Same as mke2fs, create an ext3 Linux filesystem.
mkisofs     Used to create an ISO9660/JOLIET/HFS hybrid filesystem.
mklost+found     Create a lost+found directory on a mounted ext2 filesystem.
mkmanifest     Makes a list of file names and their DOS 8.3 equivalent.
mknod     Create a FIFO, block (buffered) special file, character (unbuffered) special file with the specified name.
mkraid     Used to setup RAID device arrays.
mkswap     Set up a Linux swap area.
mktemp     Create a temporary file or directory.
mlabel     Make an MD-DOS volume label.
mmd     Make an MS-DOS subdirectory.
mmount     Mount an MS-DOS disk.
mmove     Move or rename an MS-DOS file or subdirectory.
mmv     Mass move and rename files.
modinfo     Show information about a Linux kernel module.
modprobe     Add or remove modules from the Linux kernel.
more     Display content of a file page-by-page.
most     Browse or page through a text file.
mount     Mount a filesystem.
mountd     NFS mount daemon.
mpartition     Partition an MS-DOS disk.
mpg123     Command-line mp3 player.
mpg321     Similar to mpg123.
mrd     Remove an MS-DOS subdirectory.
mren     Rename an existing MS-DOS file.
mshowfat     Show FTA clusters allocated to a file.
mt     Control magnetic tape drive operation.
mtools     Utilities to access MS-DOS disks.
mtoolstest     Tests and displays the mtools configuration files.
mtr     A network diagnostic tool.
mtype     Display contents of an MS-DOS file.
mv     Move/rename files or directories.
mzip     Change protection mode and eject disk on Zip/Jaz drive.
named     Internet domain name server.
namei     Follow a pathname until a terminal point is found.
nameif     Name network interfaces based on MAC addresses.
nc     Netcat utility. Arbitrary TCP and UDP connections and listens.
netstat     Show network information.
newaliases     Rebuilds mail alias database.
newgrp     Log-in to a new group.
newusers     Update/create new users in batch.
nfsd     Special filesystem for controlling Linux NFS server.
nfsstat     List NFS statistics.
nice     Run a program with modified scheduling priority.
nl     Show numbered line while displaying the contents of a file.
nm     List symbols from object files.
nohup     Run a command immune to hangups.
notify-send     A program to send desktop notifications.
nslookup     Used performs DNS queries. Read this article for more info.
nsupdate     Dynamic DNS update utility.
objcopy     Copy and translate object files.
objdump     Display information from object files.
od     Dump files in octal and other formats.
op     Operator access, allows system administrators to grant users access to certain root operations that require superuser privileges.
open     Open a file using its default application.
openvt     Start a program on a new virtual terminal (VT).
passwd     Change user password.
paste     Merge lines of files. Write to standard output, TAB-separated lines consisting of sqentially correspnding lines from each file.
patch     Apply a patchfile (containing differences listing by diff program) to an original file.
pathchk     Check if file names are valid or portable.
perl     Perl 5 language interpreter.
pgrep     List process IDs matching the specified criteria among all the running processes.
pidof     Find process ID of a running program.
ping     Send ICMP ECHO_REQUEST to network hosts.
pinky     Lightweight finger.
pkill     Send kill signal to processes based on name and other attributes.
pmap     Report memory map of a process.
popd     Removes directory on the head of the directory stack and takes you to the new directory on the head.
portmap     Converts RPC program numbers to IP port numbers.
poweroff     Shuts down the machine.
pppd     Point-to-point protocol daemon.
pr     Convert (column or paginate) text files for printing.
praliases     Prints the current system mail aliases.
printcap     Printer capability database.
printenv     Show values of all or specified environment variables.
printf     Show arguments formatted according to a specified format.
ps     Report a snapshot of the current processes.
ptx     Produce a permuted index of file contents.
pushd     Appends a given directory name to the head of the stack and then cd to the given directory.
pv     Monitor progress of data through a pipe.
pwck     Verify integrity of password files.
pwconv     Creates shadow from passwd and an optionally existing shadow.
pwd     Show current directory.
python    
quota     Shows disk usage, and space limits for a user or group. Without arguments, only shows user quotas.
quotacheck     Used to scan a file system for disk usage.
quotactl     Make changes to disk quotas.
quotaoff     Enable enforcement of filesystem quotas.
quotaon     Disable enforcement of filesystem quotas.
quotastats     Shows the report of quota system statistics gathered from the kernel.
raidstart     Start/stop RAID devices.
ram     RAM disk device used to access the RAM disk in raw mode.
ramsize     Show usage information for the RAM disk.
ranlib     Generate index to the contents of an archive and store it in the archive.
rar     Create and manage RAR file in Linux.
rarpd     Respond to Reverse Address Resoultion Protocol (RARP) requests.
rcp     Remote copy command to copy files between remote computers.
rdate     Set system date and time by fetching information from a remote machine.
rdev     Set or query RAM disk size, image root device, or video mode.
rdist     Remote file distribution client, maintains identical file copies over multiple hosts.
rdistd     Start the rdist server.
read     Read from a file descriptor.
readarray     Read lines from a file into an array variable.
readcd     Read/write compact disks.
readelf     Shows information about ELF (Executable and Linkable fomrat) files.
readlink     Display value of a symbolic link or canonical file name.
readonly     Mark functions and variables as read-only.
reboot     Restart the machine.
reject     Accept/reject print jobs sent to a specified destination.
remsync     Synchronize remote files over email.
rename     Rename one or more files.
renice     Change priority of active processes.
repquota     Report disk usage and quotas for a specified filesystem.
reset     Reinitialize the terminal.
resize2fs     Used to resize ext2/ext3/ext4 file systems.
restore     Restore files from a backup created using dump.
return     Exit a shell function.
rev     Show contents of a file, reversing the order of characters in every line.
rexec     Remote execution client for exec server.
rexecd     Remote execution server.
richtext     View “richtext” on an ACSII terminal.
rlogin     Used to connect a local host system with a remote host.
rlogind     Acts as the server for rlogin. It facilitates remote login, and authentication based on privileged port numbers from trusted hosts.
rm     Removes specified files and directories (not by default).
rmail     Handle remote mail received via uucp.
rmdir     Used to remove empty directories.
rmmod     A program to remove modules from Linux kernel.
rndc     Name server control utility. Send command to a BIND DNS server over a TCP connection.
rootflags     Show/set flags for the kernel image.
route     Show/change IP routing table.
routed     A daemon, invoked at boot time, to manage internet routing tables.
rpcgen     An RPC protocol compiler. Parse a file written in the RPC language.
rpcinfo     Shows RPC information. Makes an RPC call to an RPC server and reports the findings.
rpm     A package manager for linux distributions. Originally developed for RedHat Linux.
rsh     Remote shell. Connects to a specified host and executes commands.
rshd     A daemon that acts as a server for rsh and rcp commands.
rsync     A versitile to for copying files remotely and locally.
runlevel     Shows previous and current SysV runlevel.
rup     Remote status display. Shows current system status for all or specified hosts on the local network.
ruptime     Shows uptime and login details of the machines on the local network.
rusers     Shows the list of the users logged-in to the host or on all machines on the local network.
rusersd     The rsuerd daemon acts as a server that responds to the queries from rsuers command.
rwall     Sends messages to all users on the local network.
rwho     Reports who is logged-in to the hosts on the local network.
rwhod     Acts as a server for rwho and ruptime commands.
sane-find-scanner     Find SCSI and USB scanner and determine their device files.
scanadf     Retrieve multiple images from a scanner equipped with an automatic document feeder (ADF).
scanimage     Read images from image aquistion devices (scanner or camera) and display on standard output in PNM (Portable aNyMap) format.
scp     Copy files between hosts on a network securely using SSH.
screen     A window manager that enables multiple pseudo-terminals with the help of ANSI/VT100 terminal emulation.
script     Used to make a typescript of everything displayed on the screen during a terminal session.
sdiff     Shows two files side-by-side and highlights the differences.
sed     Stream editor for filtering and transforming text (from a file or a pipe input).
select     Synchronous I/O multiplexing.
sendmail     It’s a mail router or an MTA (Mail Transfer Agent). sendmail support can send a mail to one or more recepients using necessary protocols.
sensors     Shows the current readings of all sensor chips.
seq     Displays an incremental sequence of numbers from first to last.
set     Used to manipulate shell variables and functions.
setfdprm     Sets floppy disk parameters as provided by the user.
setkeycodes     Load kernel scancode-to-keycode mapping table entries.
setleds     Show/change LED light settings of the keyboard.
setmetamode     Define keyboard meta key handling. Without arguments, shows current meta key mode.
setquota     Set disk quotas for users and groups.
setsid     Run a program in a new session.
setterm     Set terminal attributes.
sftp     Secure File Transfer program.
sh     Command interpreter (shell) utility.
sha1sum     Compute and check 160-bit SHA1 checksum to verify file integrity.
shift     Shift positional parameters.
shopt     Shell options.
showkey     Examines codes sent by the keyboard displays them in printable form.
showmount     Shows information about NFS server mount on the host.
shred     Overwrite a file to hide its content (optionally delete it), making it harder to recover it.
shutdown     Power-off the machine.
size     Lists section size and the total size of a specified file.
skill     Send a signal to processes.
slabtop     Show kernel slab cache information in real-time.
slattach     Attack a network interface to a serial line.
sleep     Suspend execution for a specified amount of time (in seconds).
slocate     Display matches by searching filename databases. Takes ownership and file permission into consideration.
snice     Reset priority for processes.
sort     Sort lines of text files.
source     Run commands from a specified file.
split     Split a file into pieces of fixed size.
ss     Display socket statistics, similar to netstat.
ssh     An SSH client for logging in to a remote machine. It provides encrypted communication between the hosts.
ssh-add     Adds private key identities to the authentication agent.
ssh-agent     It holds private keys used for public key authentication.
ssh-keygen     It generates, manages, converts authentication keys for ssh.
ssh-keyscan     Gather ssh public keys.
sshd     Server for the ssh program.
stat     Display file or filesystem status.
statd     A daemon that listens for reboot notifications from other hosts, and manages the list of hosts to be notified when the local system reboots.
strace     Trace system calls and signals.
strfile     Create a random access file for storing strings.
strings     Search a specified file and prints any printable strings with at least four characters and followed by an unprintable character.
strip     Discard symbols from object files.
stty     Change and print terminal line settings.
su     Change user ID or become superuser.
sudo     Execute a command as superuser.
sum     Checksum and count the block in a file.
suspend     Suspend the execution of the current shell.
swapoff     Disable devices for paging and swapping.
swapon     Enable devices for paging and swapping.
symlink     Create a symbolic link to a file.
sync     Synchronize cached writes to persistent storage.
sysctl     Configure kernel parameters at runtime.
sysklogd     Linux system logging utilities. Provides syslogd and klogd functionalities.
syslogd     Read and log system messages to the system console and log files.
tac     Concatenate and print files in reverse order. Opposite of cat command.
tail     Show the last 10 lines of each specified file(s).
tailf     Follow the growth of a log file. (Deprecated command)
talk     A two-way screen-oriented communication utility that allows two user to exchange messages simulateneously.
talkd     A remote user communication server for talk.
tar     GNU version of the tar archiving utility. Used to store and extract multiple files from a single archive.
taskset     Set/retrieve a process’s CPU affinity.
tcpd     Access control utility for internet services.
tcpdump     Dump traffic on network. Displays a description of the contents of packets on a network interface that match the boolean expression.
tcpslice     Extract pieces of tcpdump files or merge them.
tee     Read from standard input and write to standard output and files.
telinit     Change SysV runlevel.
telnet     Telnet protocol user interface. Used to interact with another host using telnet.
telnetd     A server for the telnet protocol.
test     Check file type and compare values.
tftp     User interface to the internet TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol).
tftpd     TFTP server.
time     Run programs and summarize system resource usage.
timeout     Execute a command with a time limit.
times     Shows accumulated user and system times for the shell and it’s child processes.
tload     Shows a graph of the current system load average to the specified tty.
tmpwatch     Recursively remove files and directories which haven’t been accessed for the specified period of time.
top     Displays real-time view of processes running on the system.
touch     Change file access and modification times.
tput     Modify terminal-dependent capabilities, color, etc.
tr     Translate, squeeze, or delete characters from standard input and display on standard output.
tracepath     Traces path to a network host discovering MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit) along this path.
traceroute     Traces the route taken by the packets to reach the network host.
trap     Trap function responds to hardware signals. It defines and creates handlers to run when the shell receives signals.
troff     The troff processor of the groff text formatting system.
TRUE     Exit with a status code indicating success.
tset     Initialize terminal.
tsort     Perform topological sort.
tty     Display the filename of the terminal connected to standard input.
tune2fs     Adjust tunable filesystem parameters on ext2/ext3/ext4 filesystems.
tunelp     Set various parameters for the line printer devices.
type     Write a description for a command type.
ul     Underline text.
ulimit     Get and set user limits for the calling process.
umask     Set file mode creation mask.
umount     Unmount specified file systems.
unalias     Remove alias definitions for specified alias names.
uname     Show system information.
uncompress    Uncompress the files compressed with the compress command.
unexpand     Convert spaces to tabs for a specified file.
unicode_start     Put keyboard and console in Unicode mode.
unicode_stop     Revert keyboard and console from Unicode mode.
uniq     Report or omit repeating lines.
units     Convert units from one scalar to another.
unrar     Extract files from a RAR archive.
unset     Remove variable or function names.
unshar     Unpack shell archive scripts.
until     Execute command until a given condition is true.
uptime     Tell how long the system has been running.
useradd     Create a new user or update default user information.
userdel     Delete a user account and related files.
usermod     Modify a user account.
users     Show the list of active users on the machine.
usleep     Suspend execution for microsecond intervals.
uudecode     Decode a binary file.
uuencode     Encode a binary file.
uuidgen     Created a new UUID (Universally Unique Identifier) table.
vdir     Same as ls -l -b. Verbosely list directory contents.
vi     A text editor utility.
vidmode     Set the video mode for a kernel image. Displays current mode value without arguments. Alternative: rdev -v
vim     Vi Improved, a text-based editor which is a successor to vi.
vmstat    Shows information about processes, memory, paging, block IO, traps, disks, and CPU activity.
volname     Returns volume name for a device formatted with an ISO-9660 filesystem. For example, CD-ROM.
w     Show who is logged-on and what they’re doing.
wait     Waits for a specified process ID(s) to terminate and returns the termination status.
wall     Display a message on the terminals all the users who are currently logged-in.
warnquota     Send mail to the users who’ve exceeded their disk quota soft limit.
watch     Runs commands repeatedly until interrupted and shows their output and errors.
wc     Print newline, word, and byte count for each of the specified files.
wget     A non-interactive file download utility.
whatis     Display one line manual page descriptions.
whereis     Locate the binary, source, and man page files for a command.
which     For a given command, lists the pathnames for the files which would be executed when the command runs.
while     Conditionally execute commands (while loop).
who     Shows who is logged on.
whoami     Displays the username tied to the current effective user ID.
whois     Looks for an object in a WHOIS database
write     Display a message on other user’s terminal.
xargs     Runs a command using initial arguments and then reads remaining arguments from standard input.
xdg-open     Used to open a file or URL in an application preferred by the user.
xinetd     Extended internet services daemon. Works similar to inetd.
xz     Compress/ Decompress .xz and .lzma files.
yacc     Yet Another Compiler Compiler, a GNU Project parser generator.
yes     Repeatedly output a line with a specified string(s) until killed.
ypbind     A daemon that helps client processes to connect to an NIS server.
ypcat     Shows the NIS map (or database) for the specified MapName parameter.
ypinit     Sets up NIS maps on an NIS server.
ypmatch     Shows values for specified keys from an NIS map.
yppasswd     Change NIS login password.
yppasswdd     Acts as a server for the yppasswd command. Receives and executes requests.
yppoll     Shows the ID number or version of NIS map currently used on the NIS server.
yppush     Forces slave NIS servers to copy updated NIS maps.
ypserv     A daemon activated at system startup. It looks for information in local NIS maps.
ypset     Point a client (running ypbind) to a specifc server (running ypserv).
yptest     Calls various functions to check the configuration of NIS services.
ypwhich     Shows the hostname for NIS server or master server for a given map.
ypxfr     Transfers NIS server map from server to a local host.
zcat     Used to compress/uncompress files. Similar to gzip
zcmp     Compare compressed files.
zdiff     Compare compressed files line by line.
zdump     Displays time for the timezone mentioned.
zforce     Adds .gz extension to all gzipped files.
zgrep     Performs grep on compressed files.
zic     Creates time conversion information files using the specified input files.
zip     A file compression and packaging utility.
zless     Displays information of a compressed file (using less command) on the terminal one screen at a time.
zmore     Displays output of a compressed file (using more command) on the terminal one page at a time.
znew     Recompress .z files to .gz. files.
